Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
1
This text was adapted by The Saylor Foundation under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 License without
attribution as requested by the work’s original creator or licensee.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
2
Preface
Our goal is to provide students with a textbook that is up to date and comprehensive in its coverage of
legal and regulatory issues—and organized to permit instructors to tailor the materials to their particular
approach. This book engages students by relating law to everyday events with which they are already
familiar (or with which they are familiarizing themselves in other business courses) and by its clear,
concise, and readable style. (An earlier business law text by authors Lieberman and Siedel was hailed “the
best written text in a very crowded field.”)
This textbook provides context and essential concepts across the entire range of legal issues with which
managers and business executives must grapple. The text provides the vocabulary and legal acumen
necessary for businesspeople to talk in an educated way to their customers, employees, suppliers,
government officials—and to their own lawyers.
Traditional publishers often create confusion among customers in the text selection process by offering a
huge array of publications. Once a text is selected, customers might still have to customize the text to meet
their needs. For example, publishers usually offer books that include either case summaries or excerpted
cases, but some instructors prefer to combine case summaries with a few excerpted cases so that students
can experience reading original material. Likewise, the manner in which most conventional texts
incorporate video is cumbersome because the videos are contained in a separate library, which makes
access more complicating for instructors and students.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
3
Chapter 1
Introduction to Law and Legal Systems
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to do the following:
1. Distinguish different philosophies of law—schools of legal thought—and explain their relevance.
2. Identify the various aims that a functioning legal system can serve.
3. Explain how politics and law are related.
4. Identify the sources of law and which laws have priority over other laws.
5. Understand some basic differences between the US legal system and other legal systems.
Law has different meanings as well as different functions. Philosophers have considered issues of justice
and law for centuries, and several different approaches, or schools of legal thought, have emerged. In this
chapter, we will look at those different meanings and approaches and will consider how social and
political dynamics interact with the ideas that animate the various schools of legal thought. We will also
look at typical sources of “positive law” in the United States and how some of those sources have priority
over others, and we will set out some basic differences between the US legal system and other legal
systems.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
4
1.1 What Is Law?
Law is a word that means different things at different times. Black’s Law Dictionary says that law is “a
body of rules of action or conduct prescribed by controlling authority, and having binding legal force. That
which must be obeyed and followed by citizens subject to sanctions or legal consequence is a law.” [1]
Functions of the Law
In a nation, the law can serve to (1) keep the peace, (2) maintain the status quo, (3) preserve individual
rights, (4) protect minorities against majorities, (5) promote social justice, and (6) provide for orderly
social change. Some legal systems serve these purposes better than others. Although a nation ruled by an
authoritarian government may keep the peace and maintain the status quo, it may also oppress minorities
or political opponents (e.g., Burma, Zimbabwe, or Iraq under Saddam Hussein). Under colonialism,
European nations often imposed peace in countries whose borders were somewhat arbitrarily created by
those same European nations. Over several centuries prior to the twentieth century, empires were built by
Spain, Portugal, Britain, Holland, France, Germany, Belgium, and Italy. With regard to the functions of
the law, the empire may have kept the peace—largely with force—but it changed the status quo and
seldom promoted the native peoples’ rights or social justice within the colonized nation.
In nations that were former colonies of European nations, various ethnic and tribal factions have
frequently made it difficult for a single, united government to rule effectively. In Rwanda, for example,
power struggles between Hutus and Tutsis resulted in genocide of the Tutsi minority. (Genocide is the
deliberate and systematic killing or displacement of one group of people by another group. In 1948, the
international community formally condemned the crime of genocide.) In nations of the former Soviet
Union, the withdrawal of a central power created power vacuums that were exploited by ethnic leaders.
When Yugoslavia broke up, the different ethnic groups—Croats, Bosnians, and Serbians—fought bitterly
for home turf rather than share power. In Iraq and Afghanistan, the effective blending of different groups
of families, tribes, sects, and ethnic groups into a national governing body that shares power remains to be
seen.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
5
Law and Politics
In the United States, legislators, judges, administrative agencies, governors, and presidents make law,
with substantial input from corporations, lobbyists, and a diverse group of nongovernment organizations
(NGOs) such as the American Petroleum Institute, the Sierra Club, and the National Rifle Association. In
the fifty states, judges are often appointed by governors or elected by the people. The process of electing
state judges has become more and more politicized in the past fifteen years, with growing campaign
contributions from those who would seek to seat judges with similar political leanings.
In the federal system, judges are appointed by an elected official (the president) and confirmed by other
elected officials (the Senate). If the president is from one party and the other party holds a majority of
Senate seats, political conflicts may come up during the judges’ confirmation processes. Such a division
has been fairly frequent over the past fifty years.
In most nation-states (as countries are called in international law), knowing who has power to make and
enforce the laws is a matter of knowing who has political power; in many places, the people or groups that
have military power can also command political power to make and enforce the laws. Revolutions are
difficult and contentious, but each year there are revolts against existing political-legal authority; an
aspiration for democratic rule, or greater “rights” for citizens, is a recurring theme in politics and law.
KEY TAKEAWAY
Law is the result of political action, and the political landscape is vastly different from nation to nation.
Unstable or authoritarian governments often fail to serve the principal functions of law.
EXERCISES
1. Consider Burma (named Myanmar by its military rulers). What political rights do you have that the
average Burmese citizen does not?
2. What is a nongovernment organization, and what does it have to do with government? Do you
contribute to (or are you active in) a nongovernment organization? What kind of rights do they
espouse, what kind of laws do they support, and what kind of laws do they oppose?
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
6
[1] Black’s Law Dictionary, 6th ed., s.v. “law.”
1.2 Schools of Legal Thought
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Distinguish different philosophies of law—schools of legal thought—and explain their relevance.
2. Explain why natural law relates to the rights that the founders of the US political-legal system found
important.
3. Describe legal positivism and explain how it differs from natural law.
4. Differentiate critical legal studies and eco-feminist legal perspectives from both natural law and legal
positivist perspectives.
There are different schools (or philosophies) concerning what law is all about. Philosophy of law is also
called jurisprudence, and the two main schools are legal positivism and natural law. Although there are
others (see Section 1.2.3 "Other Schools of Legal Thought"), these two are the most influential in how
people think about the law.
Legal Positivism: Law as Sovereign Command
As legal philosopher John Austin concisely put it, “Law is the command of a sovereign.” Law is only law,
in other words, if it comes from a recognized authority and can be enforced by that authority,
or sovereign—such as a king, a president, or a dictator—who has power within a defined area or territory.
Positivism is a philosophical movement that claims that science provides the only knowledge precise
enough to be worthwhile. But what are we to make of the social phenomena of laws?
We could examine existing statutes—executive orders, regulations, or judicial decisions—in a fairly precise
way to find out what the law says. For example, we could look at the posted speed limits on most US
highways and conclude that the “correct” or “right” speed is no more than fifty-five miles per hour. Or we
could look a little deeper and find out how the written law is usually applied. Doing so, we might conclude
that sixty-one miles per hour is generally allowed by most state troopers, but that occasionally someone
gets ticketed for doing fifty-seven miles per hour in a fifty-five miles per hour zone. Either approach is 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
7
empirical, even if not rigorously scientific. The first approach, examining in a precise way what the rule
itself says, is sometimes known as the “positivist” school of legal thought. The second approach—which
relies on social context and the actual behavior of the principal actors who enforce the law—is akin to the
“legal realist” school of thought (see Section 1.2.3 "Other Schools of Legal Thought").
Positivism has its limits and its critics. New Testament readers may recall that King Herod, fearing the
birth of a Messiah, issued a decree that all male children below a certain age be killed. Because it was the
command of a sovereign, the decree was carried out (or, in legal jargon, the decree was “executed”).
Suppose a group seizes power in a particular place and commands that women cannot attend school and
can only be treated medically by women, even if their condition is life-threatening and women doctors are
few and far between. Suppose also that this command is carried out, just because it is the law and is
enforced with a vengeance. People who live there will undoubtedly question the wisdom, justice, or
goodness of such a law, but it is law nonetheless and is generally carried out. To avoid the law’s impact, a
citizen would have to flee the country entirely. During the Taliban rule in Afghanistan, from which this
example is drawn, many did flee.
The positive-law school of legal thought would recognize the lawmaker’s command as legitimate;
questions about the law’s morality or immorality would not be important. In contrast, the natural-law
school of legal thought would refuse to recognize the legitimacy of laws that did not conform to natural,
universal, or divine law. If a lawmaker issued a command that was in violation of natural law, a citizen
would be morally justified in demonstrating civil disobedience. For example, in refusing to give up her
seat to a white person, Rosa Parks believed that she was refusing to obey an unjust law.
Natural Law
The natural-law school of thought emphasizes that law should be based on a universal moral order.
Natural law was “discovered” by humans through the use of reason and by choosing between that which is
good and that which is evil. Here is the definition of natural law according to the Cambridge Dictionary of
Philosophy: “Natural law, also called the law of nature in moral and political philosophy, is an objective
norm or set of objective norms governing human behavior, similar to the positive laws of a human ruler,
but binding on all people alike and usually understood as involving a superhuman legislator.” [1]
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
8
Both the US Constitution and the United Nations (UN) Charter have an affinity for the natural-law
outlook, as it emphasizes certain objective norms and rights of individuals and nations. The US
Declaration of Independence embodies a natural-law philosophy. The following short extract should
provide some sense of the deep beliefs in natural law held by those who signed the document.
The Unanimous Declaration of the Thirteen United States of America
July 4, 1776
When in the Course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people to dissolve the
political bands which have connected them with another, and to assume among the powers of
the earth, the separate and equal station to which the Laws of Nature and of Nature’s God
entitle them, a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the
causes which impel them to the separation.
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed
by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights that among these are Life, Liberty and the
Pursuit of Happiness. That to secure these rights, Governments are instituted among Men,
deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed.…
The natural-law school has been very influential in American legal thinking. The idea that certain rights,
for example, are “unalienable” (as expressed in the Declaration of Independence and in the writings of
John Locke) is consistent with this view of the law. Individuals may have “God-given” or “natural” rights
that government cannot legitimately take away. Government only by consent of the governed is a natural
outgrowth of this view.
Civil disobedience—in the tradition of Henry Thoreau, Mahatma Gandhi, or Martin Luther King Jr.—
becomes a matter of morality over “unnatural” law. For example, in his “Letter from Birmingham Jail,”
Martin Luther King Jr. claims that obeying an unjust law is not moral and that deliberately disobeying an
unjust law is in fact a moral act that expresses “the highest respect for law”: “An individual who breaks a
law that conscience tells him is unjust, and who willingly accepts the penalty of imprisonment in order to
arouse the conscience of the community over its injustice, is in reality expressing the highest respect for
law.…One who breaks an unjust law must do so openly, lovingly, and with a willingness to accept the
penalty.” [2]
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
9
Legal positivists, on the other hand, would say that we cannot know with real confidence what “natural”
law or “universal” law is. In studying law, we can most effectively learn by just looking at what the written
law says, or by examining how it has been applied. In response, natural-law thinkers would argue that if
we care about justice, every law and every legal system must be held accountable to some higher standard,
however hard that may be to define.
It is easier to know what the law “is” than what the law “should be.” Equal employment laws, for example,
have specific statutes, rules, and decisions about racial discrimination. There are always difficult issues of
interpretation and decision, which is why courts will resolve differing views. But how can we know the
more fundamental “ought” or “should” of human equality? For example, how do we know that “all men
are created equal” (from the Declaration of Independence)? Setting aside for the moment questions about
the equality of women, or that of slaves, who were not counted as men with equal rights at the time of the
declaration—can the statement be empirically proven, or is it simply a matter of a priori knowledge? (A
priori means “existing in the mind prior to and independent of experience.”) Or is the statement about
equality a matter of faith or belief, not really provable either scientifically or rationally? The dialogue
between natural-law theorists and more empirically oriented theories of “what law is” will raise similar
questions. In this book, we will focus mostly on the law as it is, but not without also raising questions
about what it could or should be.
Other Schools of Legal Thought
The historical school of law believes that societies should base their legal decisions today on the examples
of the past. Precedent would be more important than moral arguments.
The legal realist school flourished in the 1920s and 1930s as a reaction to the historical school. Legal
realists pointed out that because life and society are constantly changing, certain laws and doctrines have
to be altered or modernized in order to remain current. The social context of law was more important to
legal realists than the formal application of precedent to current or future legal disputes. Rather than
suppose that judges inevitably acted objectively in applying an existing rule to a set of facts, legal realists
observed that judges had their own beliefs, operated in a social context, and would give legal decisions
based on their beliefs and their own social context.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
10
The legal realist view influenced the emergence of the critical legal studies (CLS) school of thought. The
“Crits” believe that the social order (and the law) is dominated by those with power, wealth, and influence.
Some Crits are clearly influenced by the economist Karl Marx and also by distributive justice theory
(see Chapter 2 "Corporate Social Responsibility and Business Ethics"). The CLS school believes the
wealthy have historically oppressed or exploited those with less wealth and have maintained social control
through law. In so doing, the wealthy have perpetuated an unjust distribution of both rights and goods in
society. Law is politics and is thus not neutral or value-free. The CLS movement would use the law to
overturn the hierarchical structures of domination in the modern society.
Related to the CLS School, yet different, is the eco-feminist school of legal thought. This school
emphasizes—and would modify—the long-standing domination of men over both women and the rest of
the natural world. Eco-feminists would say that the same social mentality that leads to exploitation of
women is at the root of man’s exploitation and degradation of the natural environment. They would say
that male ownership of land has led to a “dominator culture,” in which man is not so much a steward of
the existing environment or those “subordinate” to him but is charged with making all that he controls
economically “productive.” Wives, children, land, and animals are valued as economic resources, and legal
systems (until the nineteenth century) largely conferred rights only to men with land. Eco-feminists
would say that even with increasing civil and political rights for women (such as the right to vote) and
with some nations’ recognizing the rights of children and animals and caring for the environment, the
legacy of the past for most nations still confirms the preeminence of “man” and his dominance of both
nature and women.
KEY TAKEAWAY
Each of the various schools of legal thought has a particular view of what a legal system is or what it
should be. The natural-law theorists emphasize the rights and duties of both government and the
governed. Positive law takes as a given that law is simply the command of a sovereign, the political
power that those governed will obey. Recent writings in the various legal schools of thought emphasize
long-standing patterns of domination of the wealthy over others (the CLS school) and of men over
women (eco-feminist legal theory).
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
11
EXERCISES
1. Vandana Shiva draws a picture of a stream in a forest. She says that in our society the stream is seen
as unproductive if it is simply there, fulfilling the need for water of women’s families and
communities, until engineers come along and tinker with it, perhaps damming it and using it for
generating hydropower. The same is true of a forest, unless it is replaced with a monoculture
plantation of a commercial species. A forest may very well be productive—protecting groundwater;
creating oxygen; providing fruit, fuel, and craft materials for nearby inhabitants; and creating a habitat
for animals that are also a valuable resource. She criticizes the view that if there is no monetary
amount that can contribute to gross domestic product, neither the forest nor the river can be seen as
a productive resource. Which school of legal thought does her criticism reflect?
2. Anatole France said, “The law, in its majesty, forbids rich and poor alike from sleeping under bridges.”
Which school of legal thought is represented by this quote?
3. Adolf Eichmann was a loyal member of the National Socialist Party in the Third Reich and worked hard
under Hitler’s government during World War II to round up Jewish people for incarceration—and
eventual extermination—at labor camps like Auschwitz and Buchenwald. After an Israeli “extraction
team” took him from Argentina to Israel, he was put on trial for “crimes against humanity.” His
defense was that he was “just following orders.” Explain why Eichmann was not an adherent of the
natural-law school of legal thought.
[1] Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy, s.v. “natural law.”
[2] Martin Luther King Jr., “Letter from Birmingham Jail.”
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
12
1.3 Basic Concepts and Categories of US Positive Law
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. In a general way, differentiate contract law from tort law.
2. Consider the role of law in supporting ethical norms in our society.
3. Understand the differing roles of state law and federal law in the US legal system.
4. Know the difference between criminal cases and civil cases.
Most of what we discuss in this book is positive law—US positive law in particular. We will also consider
the laws and legal systems of other nations. But first, it will be useful to cover some basic concepts and
distinctions.
Law: The Moral Minimums in a Democratic Society
The law does not correct (or claim to correct) every wrong that occurs in society. At a minimum, it aims to
curb the worst kind of wrongs, the kinds of wrongs that violate what might be called the “moral
minimums” that a community demands of its members. These include not only violations of criminal law
(see Chapter 6 "Criminal Law") but also torts (see Chapter 7 "Introduction to Tort Law") and broken
promises (see Chapter 8 "Introduction to Contract Law"). Thus it may be wrong to refuse to return a
phone call from a friend, but that wrong will not result in a viable lawsuit against you. But if a phone (or
the Internet) is used to libel or slander someone, a tort has been committed, and the law may allow the
defamed person to be compensated.
There is a strong association between what we generally think of as ethical behavior and what the laws
require and provide. For example, contract law upholds society’s sense that promises—in general—should
be kept. Promise-breaking is seen as unethical. The law provides remedies for broken promises (in breach
of contract cases) but not for all broken promises; some excuses are accepted when it would be reasonable 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
13
to do so. For tort law, harming others is considered unethical. If people are not restrained by law from
harming one another, orderly society would be undone, leading to anarchy. Tort law provides for
compensation when serious injuries or harms occur. As for property law issues, we generally believe that
private ownership of property is socially useful and generally desirable, and it is generally protected (with
some exceptions) by laws. You can’t throw a party at my house without my permission, but my right to do
whatever I want on my own property may be limited by law; I can’t, without the public’s permission,
operate an incinerator on my property and burn heavy metals, as toxic ash may be deposited throughout
the neighborhood.
The Common Law: Property, Torts, and Contracts
Even before legislatures met to make rules for society, disputes happened and judges decided them. In
England, judges began writing down the facts of a case and the reasons for their decision. They often
resorted to deciding cases on the basis of prior written decisions. In relying on those prior decisions, the
judge would reason that since a current case was pretty much like a prior case, it ought to be decided the
same way. This is essentially reasoning by analogy. Thus the use of precedent in common-law cases came
into being, and a doctrine of stare decisis (pronounced STAR-ay-de-SIGH-sus) became accepted in
English courts. Stare decisis means, in Latin, “let the decision stand.”
Most judicial decisions that don’t apply legislative acts (known as statutes) will involve one of three areas
of law—property, contract, or tort. Property law deals with the rights and duties of those who can legally
own land (real property), how that ownership can be legally confirmed and protected, how property can
be bought and sold, what the rights of tenants (renters) are, and what the various kinds of “estates” in
land are (e.g., fee simple, life estate, future interest, easements, or rights of way). Contract law deals with
what kinds of promises courts should enforce. For example, should courts enforce a contract where one of
the parties was intoxicated, underage, or insane? Should courts enforce a contract where one of the
parties seemed to have an unfair advantage? What kind of contracts would have to be in writing to be
enforced by courts? Tort law deals with the types of cases that involve some kind of harm and or injury
between the plaintiff and the defendant when no contract exists. Thus if you are libeled or a competitor
lies about your product, your remedy would be in tort, not contract.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
14
The thirteen original colonies had been using English common law for many years, and they continued to
do so after independence from England. Early cases from the first states are full of references to alreadydecided English cases. As years went by, many precedents were established by US state courts, so that
today a judicial opinion that refers to a seventeenth- or eighteenth-century English common-law case is
quite rare.
Courts in one state may look to common-law decisions from the courts of other states where the reasoning
in a similar case is persuasive. This will happen in “cases of first impression,” a fact pattern or situation
that the courts in one state have never seen before. But if the Supreme Court in a particular state has
already ruled on a certain kind of case, lower courts in that state will always follow the rule set forth by
their highest court.
State Courts and the Domain of State Law
In the early years of our nation, federal courts were not as active or important as state courts. States had
jurisdiction (the power to make and enforce laws) over the most important aspects of business life. The
power of state law has historically included governing the following kinds of issues and claims:
• Contracts, including sales, commercial paper, letters of credit, and secured transactions
• Torts
• Property, including real property, bailments of personal property (such as when you check your coat
at a theater or leave your clothes with a dry cleaner), trademarks, copyrights, and the estates of
decedents (dead people)
• Corporations
• Partnerships
• Domestic matters, including marriage, divorce, custody, adoption, and visitation
• Securities law
• Environmental law
• Agency law, governing the relationship between principals and their agents.
• Banking
• Insurance
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
15
Over the past eighty years, however, federal law has become increasingly important in many of these
areas, including banking, securities, and environmental law.
Civil versus Criminal Cases
Most of the cases we will look at in this textbook are civil cases. Criminal cases are certainly of interest to
business, especially as companies may break criminal laws. A criminal case involves a governmental
decision—whether state or federal—to prosecute someone (named as a defendant) for violating society’s
laws. The law establishes a moral minimum and does so especially in the area of criminal laws; if you
break a criminal law, you can lose your freedom (in jail) or your life (if you are convicted of a capital
offense). In a civil action, you would not be sent to prison; in the worst case, you can lose property
(usually money or other assets), such as when Ford Motor Company lost a personal injury case and the
judge awarded $295 million to the plaintiffs or when Pennzoil won a $10.54 billion verdict against Texaco
(see Chapter 7 "Introduction to Tort Law").
Some of the basic differences between civil law and criminal law cases are illustrated in Table 1.1
"Differences between Civil and Criminal Cases".
Table 1.1 Differences between Civil and Criminal Cases
Civil Cases Criminal Cases
Parties
Plaintiff brings case; defendant must answer or lose
by default
Prosecutor brings case; defendant may
remain silent
Proof Preponderance of evidence Beyond a reasonable doubt
Reason
To settle disputes peacefully, usually between
private parties To maintain order in society
To punish the most blameworthy
To deter serious wrongdoing
Remedies Money damages (legal remedy) Fines, jail, and forfeitures
Injunctions (equitable remedy)
Specific performance (equity)
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
16
Regarding plaintiffs and prosecutors, you can often tell a civil case from a criminal case by looking at the
caption of a case going to trial. If the government appears first in the caption of the case (e.g., U.S. v.
Lieberman, it is likely that the United States is prosecuting on behalf of the people. The same is true of
cases prosecuted by state district attorneys (e.g., State v. Seidel). But this is not a foolproof formula.
Governments will also bring civil actions to collect debts from or settle disputes with individuals,
corporations, or other governments. Thus U.S. v. Mayer might be a collection action for unpaid taxes,
or U.S. v. Canada might be a boundary dispute in the International Court of Justice. Governments can be
sued, as well; people occasionally sue their state or federal government, but they can only get a trial if the
government waives its sovereign immunity and allows such suits. Warner v. U.S., for example, could be a
claim for a tax refund wrongfully withheld or for damage caused to the Warner residence by a sonic boom
from a US Air Force jet flying overhead.
Substance versus Procedure
Many rules and regulations in law are substantive, and others are procedural. We are used to seeing laws
as substantive; that is, there is some rule of conduct or behavior that is called for or some action that is
proscribed (prohibited). The substantive rules tell us how to act with one another and with the
government. For example, all of the following are substantive rules of law and provide a kind of command
or direction to citizens:
• Drive not more than fifty-five miles per hour where that speed limit is posted.
• Do not conspire to fix prices with competitors in the US market.
• Do not falsely represent the curative effects of your over-the-counter herbal remedy.
• Do not drive your motor vehicle through an intersection while a red traffic signal faces the direction
you are coming from.
• Do not discriminate against job applicants or employees on the basis of their race, sex, religion, or
national origin.
• Do not discharge certain pollutants into the river without first getting a discharge permit.
In contrast, procedural laws are the rules of courts and administrative agencies. They tell us how to
proceed if there is a substantive-law problem. For example, if you drive fifty-three miles per hour in a
forty mile-per-hour zone on Main Street on a Saturday night and get a ticket, you have broken a 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
17
substantive rule of law (the posted speed limit). Just how and what gets decided in court is a matter of
procedural law. Is the police officer’s word final, or do you get your say before a judge? If so, who goes
first, you or the officer? Do you have the right to be represented by legal counsel? Does the hearing or trial
have to take place within a certain time period? A week? A month? How long can the state take to bring its
case? What kinds of evidence will be relevant? Radar? (Does it matter what kind of training the officer has
had on the radar device? Whether the radar device had been tested adequately?) The officer’s personal
observation? (What kind of training has he had, how is he qualified to judge the speed of a car, and other
questions arise.) What if you unwisely bragged to a friend at a party recently that you went a hundred
miles an hour on Main Street five years ago at half past three on a Tuesday morning? (If the prosecutor
knows of this and the “friend” is willing to testify, is it relevant to the charge of fifty-three in a forty-mileper-hour zone?)
In the United States, all state procedural laws must be fair, since the due process clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment directs that no state shall deprive any citizen of “life, liberty, or property,” without due
process of law. (The $200 fine plus court costs are designed to deprive you of property, that is, money, if
you violate the speed limit.) Federal laws must also be fair, because the Fifth Amendment to the US
Constitution has the exact same due process language as the Fourteenth Amendment. This suggests that
some laws are more powerful or important than others, which is true. The next section looks at various
types of positive law and their relative importance.
KEY TAKEAWAY
In most legal systems, like that in the United States, there is a fairly firm distinction between criminal
law (for actions that are offenses against the entire society) and civil law (usually for disputes between
individuals or corporations). Basic ethical norms for promise-keeping and not harming others are
reflected in the civil law of contracts and torts. In the United States, both the states and the federal
government have roles to play, and sometimes these roles will overlap, as in environmental standards
set by both states and the federal government.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
18
EXERCISES
1. Jenna gets a ticket for careless driving after the police come to investigate a car accident she had with
you on Hanover Boulevard. Your car is badly damaged through no fault of your own. Is Jenna likely to
face criminal charges, civil charges, or both?
2. Jenna’s ticket says that she has thirty days in which to respond to the charges against her. The thirty
days conforms to a state law that sets this time limit. Is the thirty-day limit procedural law or
substantive law?
1.4 Sources of Law and Their Priority
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Describe the different sources of law in the US legal system and the principal institutions that create
those laws.
2. Explain in what way a statute is like a treaty, and vice versa.
3. Explain why the Constitution is “prior” and has priority over the legislative acts of a majority, whether
in the US Congress or in a state legislature.
4. Describe the origins of the common-law system and what common law means.
Sources of Law
In the United States today, there are numerous sources of law. The main ones are (1) constitutions—both
state and federal, (2) statutes and agency regulations, and (3) judicial decisions. In addition, chief
executives (the president and the various governors) can issue executive orders that have the effect of law.
In international legal systems, sources of law include treaties (agreements between states or countries)
and what is known as customary international law (usually consisting of judicial decisions from national
court systems where parties from two or more nations are in a dispute).
As you might expect, these laws sometimes conflict: a state law may conflict with a federal law, or a
federal law might be contrary to an international obligation. One nation’s law may provide one
substantive rule, while another nation’s law may provide a different, somewhat contrary rule to apply. Not 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
19
all laws, in other words, are created equal. To understand which laws have priority, it is essential to
understand the relationships between the various kinds of law.
Constitutions
Constitutions are the foundation for a state or nation’s other laws, providing the country’s legislative,
executive, and judicial framework. Among the nations of the world, the United States has the oldest
constitution still in use. It is difficult to amend, which is why there have only been seventeen amendments
following the first ten in 1789; two-thirds of the House and Senate must pass amendments, and threefourths of the states must approve them.
The nation’s states also have constitutions. Along with providing for legislative, executive, and judicial
functions, state constitutions prescribe various rights of citizens. These rights may be different from, and
in addition to, rights granted by the US Constitution. Like statutes and judicial decisions, a constitution’s
specific provisions can provide people with a “cause of action” on which to base a lawsuit (see Section
1.4.3 "Causes of Action, Precedent, and " on “causes of action”). For example, California’s constitution
provides that the citizens of that state have a right of privacy. This has been used to assert claims against
businesses that invade an employee’s right of privacy. In the case of Virginia Rulon-Miller, her employer,
International Business Machines (IBM), told her to stop dating a former colleague who went to work for a
competitor. When she refused, IBM terminated her, and a jury fined the company for $300,000 in
damages. As the California court noted, “While an employee sacrifices some privacy rights when he enters
the workplace, the employee’s privacy expectations must be balanced against the employer’s interests.…
[T]he point here is that privacy, like the other unalienable rights listed first in our Constitution…is
unquestionably a fundamental interest of our society.” [1]
Statutes and Treaties in Congress
In Washington, DC, the federal legislature is known as Congress and has both a House of Representatives
and a Senate. The House is composed of representatives elected every two years from various districts in
each state. These districts are established by Congress according to population as determined every ten
years by the census, a process required by the Constitution. Each state has at least one district; the most
populous state (California) has fifty-two districts. In the Senate, there are two senators from each state, 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
20
regardless of the state’s population. Thus Delaware has two senators and California has two senators, even
though California has far more people. Effectively, less than 20 percent of the nation’s population can
send fifty senators to Washington.
Many consider this to be antidemocratic. The House of Representatives, on the other hand, is directly
proportioned by population, though no state can have less than one representative.
Each Congressional legislative body has committees for various purposes. In these committees, proposed
bills are discussed, hearings are sometimes held, and bills are either reported out (brought to the floor for
a vote) or killed in committee. If a bill is reported out, it may be passed by majority vote. Because of the
procedural differences between the House and the Senate, bills that have the same language when
proposed in both houses are apt to be different after approval by each body. A conference committee will
then be held to try to match the two versions. If the two versions differ widely enough, reconciliation of
the two differing versions into one acceptable to both chambers (House and Senate) is more difficult.
If the House and Senate can agree on identical language, the reconciled bill will be sent to the president
for signature or veto. The Constitution prescribes that the president will have veto power over any
legislation. But the two bodies can override a presidential veto with a two-thirds vote in each chamber.
In the case of treaties, the Constitution specifies that only the Senate must ratify them. When the Senate
ratifies a treaty, it becomes part of federal law, with the same weight and effect as a statute passed by the
entire Congress. The statutes of Congress are collected in codified form in the US Code. The code is
available online at http://uscode.house.gov.
Delegating Legislative Powers: Rules by Administrative Agencies
Congress has found it necessary and useful to create government agencies to administer various laws
(see Chapter 5 "Administrative Law"). The Constitution does not expressly provide for administrative
agencies, but the US Supreme Court has upheld the delegation of power to create federal agencies.
Examples of administrative agencies would include the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA), the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the Federal Trade Commission (FTC).
It is important to note that Congress does not have unlimited authority to delegate its lawmaking powers
to an agency. It must delegate its authority with some guidelines for the agency and cannot altogether
avoid its constitutional responsibilities (see Chapter 5 "Administrative Law").
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
21
Agencies propose rules in the Federal Register, published each working day of the year. Rules that are
formally adopted are published in the Code of Federal Regulations, or CFR, available online
athttp://www.access.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/cfr-table-search.html.
State Statutes and Agencies: Other Codified Law
Statutes are passed by legislatures and provide general rules for society. States have legislatures
(sometimes called assemblies), which are usually made up of both a senate and a house of representatives.
Like the federal government, state legislatures will agree on the provisions of a bill, which is then sent to
the governor (acting like the president for that state) for signature. Like the president, governors often
have a veto power. The process of creating and amending, or changing, laws is filled with political
negotiation and compromise.
On a more local level, counties and municipal corporations or townships may be authorized under a
state’s constitution to create or adopt ordinances. Examples of ordinances include local building codes,
zoning laws, and misdemeanors or infractions such as skateboarding or jaywalking. Most of the more
unusual laws that are in the news from time to time are local ordinances. For example, in Logan County,
Colorado, it is illegal to kiss a sleeping woman; in Indianapolis, Indiana, and Eureka, Nebraska, it is a
crime to kiss if you have a mustache. But reportedly, some states still have odd laws here and there.
Kentucky law proclaims that every person in the state must take a bath at least once a year, and failure to
do so is illegal.
Judicial Decisions: The Common Law
Common law consists of decisions by courts (judicial decisions) that do not involve interpretation of
statutes, regulations, treaties, or the Constitution. Courts make such interpretations, but many cases are
decided where there is no statutory or other codified law or regulation to be interpreted. For example, a
state court deciding what kinds of witnesses are required for a valid will in the absence of a rule (from a
statute) is making common law.
United States law comes primarily from the tradition of English common law. By the time England’s
American colonies revolted in 1776, English common-law traditions were well established in the colonial
courts. English common law was a system that gave written judicial decisions the force of law throughout 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
22
the country. Thus if an English court delivered an opinion as to what constituted the common-law crime
of burglary, other courts would stick to that decision, so that a common body of law developed throughout
the country. Common law is essentially shorthand for the notion that a common body of law, based on
past written decisions, is desirable and necessary.
In England and in the laws of the original thirteen states, common-law decisions defined crimes such as
arson, burglary, homicide, and robbery. As time went on, US state legislatures either adopted or modified
common-law definitions of most crimes by putting them in the form of codes or statutes. This legislative
ability—to modify or change common law into judicial law—points to an important phenomenon: the
priority of statutory law over common law. As we will see in the next section, constitutional law will have
priority over statutory law.
Priority of Laws
The Constitution as Preemptive Force in US Law
The US Constitution takes precedence over all statutes and judicial decisions that are inconsistent. For
example, if Michigan were to decide legislatively that students cannot speak ill of professors in statesponsored universities, that law would be void, since it is inconsistent with the state’s obligation under the
First Amendment to protect free speech. Or if the Michigan courts were to allow a professor to bring a
lawsuit against a student who had said something about him that was derogatory but not defamatory, the
state’s judicial system would not be acting according to the First Amendment. (As we will see in Chapter 7
"Introduction to Tort Law", free speech has its limits; defamation was a cause of action at the time the
First Amendment was added to the Constitution, and it has been understood that the free speech rights in
the First Amendment did not negate existing common law.)
Statutes and Cases
Statutes generally have priority, or take precedence, over case law (judicial decisions). Under commonlaw judicial decisions, employers could hire young children for difficult work, offer any wage they wanted,
and not pay overtime work at a higher rate. But various statutes changed that. For example, the federal
Fair Labor Standards Act (1938) forbid the use of oppressive child labor and established a minimum pay
wage and overtime pay rules.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
23
Treaties as Statutes: The “Last in Time” Rule
A treaty or convention is considered of equal standing to a statute. Thus when Congress ratified the North
American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), any judicial decisions or previous statutes that were
inconsistent—such as quotas or limitations on imports from Mexico that were opposite to NAFTA
commitments—would no longer be valid. Similarly, US treaty obligations under the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and obligations made later through the World Trade Organization (WTO)
would override previous federal or state statutes.
One example of treaty obligations overriding, or taking priority over, federal statutes was the tunadolphin dispute between the United States and Mexico. The Marine Mammal Protection Act amendments
in 1988 spelled out certain protections for dolphins in the Eastern Tropical Pacific, and the United States
began refusing to allow the importation of tuna that were caught using “dolphin-unfriendly” methods
(such as purse seining). This was challenged at a GATT dispute panel in Switzerland, and the United
States lost. The discussion continued at the WTO under its dispute resolution process. In short, US
environmental statutes can be ruled contrary to US treaty obligations.
Under most treaties, the United States can withdraw, or take back, any voluntary limitation on its
sovereignty; participation in treaties is entirely elective. That is, the United States may “unbind” itself
whenever it chooses. But for practical purposes, some limitations on sovereignty may be good for the
nation. The argument goes something like this: if free trade in general helps the United States, then it
makes some sense to be part of a system that promotes free trade; and despite some temporary setbacks,
the WTO decision process will (it is hoped) provide far more benefits than losses in the long run. This
argument invokes utilitarian theory (that the best policy does the greatest good overall for society) and
David Ricardo’s theory of comparative advantage.
Ultimately, whether the United States remains a supporter of free trade and continues to participate as a
leader in the WTO will depend upon citizens electing leaders who support the process. Had Ross Perot
been elected in 1992, for example, NAFTA would have been politically (and legally) dead during his term
of office.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
24
Causes of Action, Precedent, and Stare Decisis
No matter how wrong someone’s actions may seem to you, the only wrongs you can right in a court are
those that can be tied to one or more causes of action. Positive law is full of cases, treaties, statutes,
regulations, and constitutional provisions that can be made into a cause of action. If you have an
agreement with Harold Hill that he will purchase seventy-six trombones from you and he fails to pay for
them after you deliver, you will probably feel wronged, but a court will only act favorably on your
complaint if you can show that his behavior gives you a cause of action based on some part of your state’s
contract law. This case would give you a cause of action under the law of most states; unless Harold Hill
had some legal excuse recognized by the applicable state’s contract law—such as his legal incompetence,
his being less than eighteen years of age, his being drunk at the time the agreement was made, or his claim
that the instruments were trumpets rather than trombones or that they were delivered too late to be of use
to him—you could expect to recover some compensation for his breaching of your agreement with him.
An old saying in the law is that the law does not deal in trifles, or unimportant issues (in Latin, de minimis
non curat lex). Not every wrong you may suffer in life will be a cause to bring a court action. If you are
stood up for a Saturday night date and feel embarrassed or humiliated, you cannot recover anything in a
court of law in the United States, as there is no cause of action (no basis in the positive law) that you can
use in your complaint. If you are engaged to be married and your spouse-to-be bolts from the wedding
ceremony, there are some states that do provide a legal basis on which to bring a lawsuit. “Breach of
promise to marry” is recognized in several states, but most states have abolished this cause of action,
either by judicial decision or by legislation. Whether a runaway bride or groom gives rise to a valid cause
of action in the courts depends on whether the state courts still recognize and enforce this nowdisappearing cause of action.
Your cause of action is thus based on existing laws, including decided cases. How closely your case “fits”
with a prior decided case raises the question of precedent.
As noted earlier in this chapter, the English common-law tradition placed great emphasis on precedent
and what is called stare decisis. A court considering one case would feel obliged to decide that case in a
way similar to previously decided cases. Written decisions of the most important cases had been spread
throughout England (the common “realm”), and judges hoped to establish a somewhat predictable,
consistent group of decisions.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
25
The English legislature (Parliament) was not in the practice of establishing detailed statutes on crimes,
torts, contracts, or property. Thus definitions and rules were left primarily to the courts. By their nature,
courts could only decide one case at a time, but in doing so they would articulate holdings, or general
rules, that would apply to later cases.
Suppose that one court had to decide whether an employer could fire an employee for no reason at all.
Suppose that there were no statutes that applied to the facts: there was no contract between the employer
and the employee, but the employee had worked for the employer for many years, and now a younger
person was replacing him. The court, with no past guidelines, would have to decide whether the employee
had stated a “cause of action” against the employer. If the court decided that the case was not legally
actionable, it would dismiss the action. Future courts would then treat similar cases in a similar way. In
the process, the court might make a holding that employers could fire employees for any reason or for no
reason. This rule could be applied in the future should similar cases come up.
But suppose that an employer fired an employee for not committing perjury (lying on the witness stand in
a court proceeding); the employer wanted the employee to cover up the company's criminal or unethical
act. Suppose that, as in earlier cases, there were no applicable statutes and no contract of employment.
Courts relying on a holding or precedent that “employers may fire employees for any reason or no reason”
might rule against an employee seeking compensation for being fired for telling the truth on the witness
stand. Or it might make an exception to the general rule, such as, “Employers may generally discharge
employees for any reason or for no reason without incurring legal liability; however, employers will incur
legal liability for firing an employee who refuses to lie on behalf of the employer in a court proceeding.”
In each case (the general rule and its exception), the common-law tradition calls for the court to explain
the reasons for its ruling. In the case of the general rule, “freedom of choice” might be the major reason.
In the case of the perjury exception, the efficiency of the judicial system and the requirements of
citizenship might be used as reasons. Because the court’s “reasons” will be persuasive to some and not to
others, there is inevitably a degree of subjectivity to judicial opinions. That is, reasonable people will
disagree as to the persuasiveness of the reasoning a court may offer for its decision.
Written judicial opinions are thus a good playing field for developing critical thinking skills by identifying
the issue in a case and examining the reasons for the court’s previous decision(s), or holding.
What has the court actually decided, and why? Remember that a court, especially the US Supreme Court, 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
26
is not only deciding one particular case but also setting down guidelines (in its holdings) for federal and
state courts that encounter similar issues. Note that court cases often raise a variety of issues or questions
to be resolved, and judges (and attorneys) will differ as to what the real issue in a case is. A holding is the
court’s complete answer to an issue that is critical to deciding the case and thus gives guidance to the
meaning of the case as a precedent for future cases.
Beyond the decision of the court, it is in looking at the court’s reasoning that you are most likely to
understand what facts have been most significant to the court and what theories (schools of legal thought)
each trial or appellate judge believes in. Because judges do not always agree on first principles (i.e., they
subscribe to different schools of legal thought), there are many divided opinions in appellate opinions and
in each US Supreme Court term.
KEY TAKEAWAY
There are different sources of law in the US legal system. The US Constitution is foundational; US
statutory and common law cannot be inconsistent with its provisions. Congress creates statutory law
(with the signature of the president), and courts will interpret constitutional law and statutory law.
Where there is neither constitutional law nor statutory law, the courts function in the realm of
common law. The same is true of law within the fifty states, each of which also has a constitution, or
foundational law.
Both the federal government and the states have created administrative agencies. An agency only has
the power that the legislature gives it. Within the scope of that power, an agency will often create
regulations (see Chapter 5 "Administrative Law"), which have the same force and effect as statutes.
Treaties are never negotiated and concluded by states, as the federal government has exclusive
authority over relations with other nation-states. A treaty, once ratified by the Senate, has the same
force and effect as a statute passed by Congress and signed into law by the president.
Constitutions, statutes, regulations, treaties, and court decisions can provide a legal basis in the
positive law. You may believe you have been wronged, but for you to have a right that is enforceable in
court, you must have something in the positive law that you can point to that will support a cause of
action against your chosen defendant.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
27
EXERCISES
1. Give one example of where common law was overridden by the passage of a federal statute.
2. How does common law change or evolve without any action on the part of a legislature?
3. Lindsey Paradise is not selected for her sorority of choice at the University of Kansas. She has spent all
her time rushing that particular sorority, which chooses some of her friends but not her. She is
disappointed and angry and wants to sue the sorority. What are her prospects of recovery in the legal
system? Explain.
[1] Rulon-Miller v. International Business Machines Corp., 162 Cal. App.3d 241, 255 (1984).
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
28
1.5 Legal and Political Systems of the World
LEARNING OBJECTIVE
1. Describe how the common-law system differs from the civil-law system.
Other legal and political systems are very different from the US system, which came from English
common-law traditions and the framers of the US Constitution. Our legal and political traditions are
different both in what kinds of laws we make and honor and in how disputes are resolved in court.
Comparing Common-Law Systems with Other Legal Systems
The common-law tradition is unique to England, the United States, and former colonies of the British
Empire. Although there are differences among common-law systems (e.g., most nations do not permit
their judiciaries to declare legislative acts unconstitutional; some nations use the jury less frequently), all
of them recognize the use of precedent in judicial cases, and none of them relies on the comprehensive,
legislative codes that are prevalent in civil-law systems.
Civil-Law Systems
The main alternative to the common-law legal system was developed in Europe and is based in Roman
and Napoleonic law. A civil-law or code-law system is one where all the legal rules are in one or more
comprehensive legislative enactments. During Napoleon’s reign, a comprehensive book of laws—a code—
was developed for all of France. The code covered criminal law, criminal procedure, noncriminal law and
procedure, and commercial law. The rules of the code are still used today in France and in other
continental European legal systems. The code is used to resolve particular cases, usually by judges without
a jury. Moreover, the judges are not required to follow the decisions of other courts in similar cases. As
George Cameron of the University of Michigan has noted, “The law is in the code, not in the cases.” He
goes on to note, “Where several cases all have interpreted a provision in a particular way, the French
courts may feel bound to reach the same result in future cases, under the doctrine of jurisprudence
constante. The major agency for growth and change, however, is the legislature, not the courts.”
Civil-law systems are used throughout Europe as well as in Central and South America. Some nations in
Asia and Africa have also adopted codes based on European civil law. Germany, Holland, Spain, France, 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
29
and Portugal all had colonies outside of Europe, and many of these colonies adopted the legal practices
that were imposed on them by colonial rule, much like the original thirteen states of the United States,
which adopted English common-law practices.
One source of possible confusion at this point is that we have already referred to US civil law in contrast to
criminal law. But the European civil law covers both civil and criminal law.
There are also legal systems that differ significantly from the common-law and civil-law systems. The
communist and socialist legal systems that remain (e.g., in Cuba and North Korea) operate on very
different assumptions than those of either English common law or European civil law. Islamic and other
religion-based systems of law bring different values and assumptions to social and commercial relations.
KEY TAKEAWAY
Legal systems vary widely in their aims and in the way they process civil and criminal cases. Commonlaw systems use juries, have one judge, and adhere to precedent. Civil-law systems decide cases
without a jury, often use three judges, and often render shorter opinions without reference to
previously decided cases.
EXERCISE
1. Use the Internet to identify some of the better-known nations with civil-law systems. Which Asian
nations came to adopt all or part of civil-law traditions, and why?
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
30
1.6 A Sample Case
Preliminary Note to Students
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 is a federal statute that applies to all employers whose workforce
exceeds fifteen people. The text of Title VII says that
(a) it shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employer—
(1) to fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any individual, or otherwise to discriminate against
any individual with respect to his compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of
employment, because of such individual’s race, color, religion, sex, or natural origin.
At common law—where judges decide cases without reference to statutory guidance—employers were
generally free to hire and fire on any basis they might choose, and employees were generally free to work
for an employer or quit an employer on any basis they might choose (unless the employer and the
employee had a contract). This rule has been called “employment at will.” State and federal statutes that
prohibit discrimination on any basis (such as the prohibitions on discrimination because of race, color,
religion, sex, or national origin in Title VII) are essentially legislative exceptions to the common-law
employment-at-will rule.
In the 1970s, many female employees began to claim a certain kind of sex discrimination: sexual
harassment. Some women were being asked to give sexual favors in exchange for continued employment
or promotion (quid pro quo sexual harassment) or found themselves in a working environment that put
their chances for continued employment or promotion at risk. This form of sexual discrimination came to
be called “hostile working environment” sexual harassment.
Notice that the statute itself says nothing about sexual harassment but speaks only in broad terms about
discrimination “because of” sex (and four other factors). Having set the broad policy, Congress left it to
employees, employers, and the courts to fashion more specific rules through the process of civil litigation.
This is a case from our federal court system, which has a trial or hearing in the federal district court, an
appeal to the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals, and a final appeal to the US Supreme Court. Teresa Harris,
having lost at both the district court and the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals, here has petitioned for a writ
of certiorari (asking the court to issue an order to bring the case to the Supreme Court), a petition that is
granted less than one out of every fifty times. The Supreme Court, in other words, chooses its cases
carefully. Here, the court wanted to resolve a difference of opinion among the various circuit courts of 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
31
appeal as to whether or not a plaintiff in a hostile-working-environment claim could recover damages
without showing “severe psychological injury.”
Harris v. Forklift Systems
510 U.S. 17 (U.S. Supreme Court 1992)
JUDGES: O’CONNOR, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court. SCALIA, J., and GINSBURG, J.,
filed concurring opinions.
JUSTICE O’CONNOR delivered the opinion of the Court.
In this case we consider the definition of a discriminatorily “abusive work environment” (also known as a
“hostile work environment”) under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 78 Stat. 253, as amended, 42
U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. (1988 ed., Supp. III).
I
Teresa Harris worked as a manager at Forklift Systems, Inc., an equipment rental company, from April
1985 until October 1987. Charles Hardy was Forklift’s president.
The Magistrate found that, throughout Harris’ time at Forklift, Hardy often insulted her because of her
gender and often made her the target of unwanted sexual innuendoes. Hardy told Harris on several
occasions, in the presence of other employees, “You’re a woman, what do you know” and “We need a man
as the rental manager”; at least once, he told her she was “a dumbass woman.” Again in front of others, he
suggested that the two of them “go to the Holiday Inn to negotiate [Harris’s] raise.” Hardy occasionally
asked Harris and other female employees to get coins from his front pants pocket. He threw objects on the
ground in front of Harris and other women, and asked them to pick the objects up. He made sexual
innuendoes about Harris’ and other women’s clothing.
In mid-August 1987, Harris complained to Hardy about his conduct. Hardy said he was surprised that
Harris was offended, claimed he was only joking, and apologized. He also promised he would stop, and
based on this assurance Harris stayed on the job. But in early September, Hardy began anew: While
Harris was arranging a deal with one of Forklift’s customers, he asked her, again in front of other
employees, “What did you do, promise the guy…some [sex] Saturday night?” On October 1, Harris
collected her paycheck and quit.
Harris then sued Forklift, claiming that Hardy’s conduct had created an abusive work environment for her
because of her gender. The United States District Court for the Middle District of Tennessee, adopting the 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
32
report and recommendation of the Magistrate, found this to be “a close case,” but held that Hardy’s
conduct did not create an abusive environment. The court found that some of Hardy’s comments
“offended [Harris], and would offend the reasonable woman,” but that they were not “so severe as to be
expected to seriously affect [Harris’s] psychological well-being. A reasonable woman manager under like
circumstances would have been offended by Hardy, but his conduct would not have risen to the level of
interfering with that person’s work performance.
“Neither do I believe that [Harris] was subjectively so offended that she suffered injury.…Although Hardy
may at times have genuinely offended [Harris], I do not believe that he created a working environment so
poisoned as to be intimidating or abusive to [Harris].”
In focusing on the employee’s psychological well-being, the District Court was following Circuit precedent.
See Rabidue v. Osceola Refining Co., 805 F.2d 611, 620 (CA6 1986), cert. denied, 481 U.S. 1041, 95 L. Ed.
2d 823, 107 S. Ct. 1983 (1987). The United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit affirmed in a brief
unpublished decision…reported at 976 F.2d 733 (1992).
We granted certiorari, 507 U.S. 959 (1993), to resolve a conflict among the Circuits on whether conduct,
to be actionable as “abusive work environment” harassment (no quid pro quo harassment issue is present
here), must “seriously affect [an employee’s] psychological well-being” or lead the plaintiff to “suffer
injury.” Compare Rabidue (requiring serious effect on psychological well-being); Vance v. Southern Bell
Telephone & Telegraph Co., 863 F.2d 1503, 1510 (CA11 1989) (same); and Downes v. FAA, 775 F.2d 288,
292 (CA Fed. 1985) (same), with Ellison v. Brady, 924 F.2d 872, 877–878 (CA9 1991) (rejecting such a
requirement).
II
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 makes it “an unlawful employment practice for an employer…to
discriminate against any individual with respect to his compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of
employment, because of such individual’s race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.” 42 U.S.C. § 2000e2(a)(1). As we made clear in Meritor Savings Bank, FSB v. Vinson, 477 U.S. 57 (1986), this language “is
not limited to ‘economic’ or ‘tangible’ discrimination. The phrase ‘terms, conditions, or privileges of
employment’ evinces a congressional intent ‘to strike at the entire spectrum of disparate treatment of men
and women’ in employment,” which includes requiring people to work in a discriminatorily hostile or
abusive environment. Id., at 64, quoting Los Angeles Dept. of Water and Power v. Manhart, 435 U.S. 702, 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
33
707, n.13, 55 L. Ed. 2d 657, 98 S. Ct. 1370 (1978). When the workplace is permeated with “discriminatory
intimidation, ridicule, and insult,” 477 U.S. at 65, that is “sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the
conditions of the victim’s employment and create an abusive working environment,” Title VII is violated.
This standard, which we reaffirm today, takes a middle path between makings actionable any conduct that
is merely offensive and requiring the conduct to cause a tangible psychological injury. As we pointed out
in Meritor, “mere utterance of a…epithet which engenders offensive feelings in an employee,” does not
sufficiently affect the conditions of employment to implicate Title VII. Conduct that is not severe or
pervasive enough to create an objectively hostile or abusive work environment—an environment that a
reasonable person would find hostile or abusive—is beyond Title VII’s purview. Likewise, if the victim
does not subjectively perceive the environment to be abusive, the conduct has not actually altered the
conditions of the victim’s employment, and there is no Title VII violation.
But Title VII comes into play before the harassing conduct leads to a nervous breakdown. A
discriminatorily abusive work environment, even one that does not seriously affect employees’
psychological well-being, can and often will detract from employees’ job performance, discourage
employees from remaining on the job, or keep them from advancing in their careers. Moreover, even
without regard to these tangible effects, the very fact that the discriminatory conduct was so severe or
pervasive that it created a work environment abusive to employees because of their race, gender, religion,
or national origin offends Title VII’s broad rule of workplace equality. The appalling conduct alleged in
Meritor, and the reference in that case to environments “‘so heavily polluted with discrimination as to
destroy completely the emotional and psychological stability of minority group workers,’” Id., at 66,
quoting Rogers v. EEOC, 454 F.2d 234, 238 (CA5 1971), cert. denied, 406 U.S. 957,32 L. Ed. 2d 343, 92 S.
Ct. 2058 (1972), merely present some especially egregious examples of harassment. They do not mark the
boundary of what is actionable.
We therefore believe the District Court erred in relying on whether the conduct “seriously affected
plaintiff’s psychological well-being” or led her to “suffer injury.” Such an inquiry may needlessly focus the
fact finder’s attention on concrete psychological harm, an element Title VII does not require. Certainly
Title VII bars conduct that would seriously affect a reasonable person’s psychological well-being, but the
statute is not limited to such conduct. So long as the environment would reasonably be perceived, and is 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
34
perceived, as hostile or abusive, Meritor, supra, at 67, there is no need for it also to be psychologically
injurious.
This is not, and by its nature cannot be, a mathematically precise test. We need not answer today all the
potential questions it neither raises, nor specifically address the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission’s new regulations on this subject, see 58 Fed. Reg. 51266 (1993) (proposed 29 CFR §§ 1609.1,
1609.2); see also 29 CFR § 1604.11 (1993). But we can say that whether an environment is “hostile” or
“abusive” can be determined only by looking at all the circumstances. These may include the frequency of
the discriminatory conduct; its severity; whether it is physically threatening or humiliating, or a mere
offensive utterance; and whether it unreasonably interferes with an employee’s work performance. The
effect on the employee’s psychological well-being is, of course, relevant to determining whether the
plaintiff actually found the environment abusive. But while psychological harm, like any other relevant
factor, may be taken into account, no single factor is required.
III
Forklift, while conceding that a requirement that the conduct seriously affect psychological well-being is
unfounded, argues that the District Court nonetheless correctly applied the Meritor standard. We
disagree. Though the District Court did conclude that the work environment was not “intimidating or
abusive to [Harris],” it did so only after finding that the conduct was not “so severe as to be expected to
seriously affect plaintiff’s psychological well-being,” and that Harris was not “subjectively so offended that
she suffered injury,” ibid. The District Court’s application of these incorrect standards may well have
influenced its ultimate conclusion, especially given that the court found this to be a “close case.”
We therefore reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals, and remand the case for further proceedings
consistent with this opinion.
So ordered.
Note to Students
This was only the second time that the Supreme Court had decided a sexual harassment case. Many
feminist legal studies scholars feared that the court would raise the bar and make hostile-workingenvironment claims under Title VII more difficult to win. That did not happen. When the question to be
decided is combined with the court’s decision, we get the holding of the case. Here, the question that the 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
35
court poses, plus its answer, yields a holding that “An employee need not prove severe psychological
injury in order to win a Title VII sexual harassment claim.” This holding will be true until such time as the
court revisits a similar question and answers it differently. This does happen, but happens rarely.
CASE QUESTIONS
1. Is this a criminal case or a civil-law case? How can you tell?
2. Is the court concerned with making a procedural rule here, or is the court making a statement about
the substantive law?
3. Is this a case where the court is interpreting the Constitution, a federal statute, a state statute, or the
common law?
4. In Harris v. Forklift, what if the trial judge does not personally agree that women should have any
rights to equal treatment in the workplace? Why shouldn’t that judge dismiss the case even before
trial? Or should the judge dismiss the case after giving the female plaintiff her day in court?
5. What was the employer’s argument in this case? Do you agree or disagree with it? What if those who
legislated Title VII gave no thought to the question of seriousness of injury at all?
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
36
1.7 Summary and Exercises
Summary
There are differing conceptions of what law is and of what law should be. Laws and legal systems differ
worldwide. The legal system in the United States is founded on the US Constitution, which is itself
inspired by natural-law theory and the idea that people have rights that cannot be taken by government
but only protected by government. The various functions of the law are done well or poorly depending on
which nation-state you look at. Some do very well in terms of keeping order, while others do a better job
of allowing civil and political freedoms. Social and political movements within each nation greatly affect
the nature and quality of the legal system within that nation.
This chapter has familiarized you with a few of the basic schools of legal thought, such as natural law,
positive law, legal realism, and critical legal studies. It has also given you a brief background in common
law, including contracts, torts, and criminal law. The differences between civil and criminal cases,
substance and procedure, and the various sources of law have also been reviewed. Each source has a
different level of authority, starting with constitutions, which are primary and will negate any lower-court
laws that are not consistent with its principles and provisions. The basic differences between the common
law and civil law (continental, or European) systems of law are also discussed.
EXERCISES
1. What is the common law? Where do the courts get the authority to interpret it and to change it?
2. After World War II ended in 1945, there was an international tribunal at Nuremberg that prosecuted
various officials in Germany’s Third Reich who had committed “crimes against humanity.” Many of
them claim that they were simply “following orders” of Adolf Hitler and his chief lieutenants. What
law, if any, have they violated?
3. What does stare decisis mean, and why is it so basic to common-law legal tradition?
4. In the following situations, which source of law takes priority, and why?
a. The state statute conflicts with the common law of that state.
b. A federal statute conflicts with the US Constitution.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
37
c. A common-law decision in one state conflicts with the US Constitution.
d. A federal statute conflicts with a state constitution.
SELF -TEST QUESTIONS
1. The source of law that is foundational in the US legal system is
a. the common law
b. statutory law
c. constitutional law
d. administrative law
“Law is the command of a sovereign” represents what school of legal thought?
a. civil law
b. constitutional law
c. natural law
d. eco-feminist law
e. positive law
Which of the following kinds of law are most often found in state law rather than federal
law?
a. torts and contracts
b. bankruptcy
c. maritime law
d. international law
Where was natural law discovered?
a. in nature
b. in constitutions and statutes
c. in the exercise of human reason
d. in the Wall Street Journal
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
38
Wolfe is a state court judge in California. In the case of Riddick v. Clouse, which involves a
contract dispute, Wolfe must follow precedent. She establishes a logical relationship between
the Riddick case and a case decided by the California Supreme Court, Zhu v. Patel Enterprises,
Inc. She compares the facts of Riddick to the facts in Zhu and to the extent the facts are
similar, applies the same rule to reach her decision. This is
a. deductive reasoning
b. faulty reasoning
c. linear reasoning
d. reasoning by analogy
Moore is a state court judge in Colorado. In the case of Cassidy v. Seawell, also a contract
dispute, there is no Colorado Supreme Court or court of appeals decision that sets forth a rule
that could be applied. However, the California case of Zhu v. Patel Enterprises, Inc. is “very
close” on the facts and sets forth a rule of law that could be applied to the Cassidy case. What
process must Moore follow in considering whether to use the Zhu case as precedent?
a. Moore is free to decide the case any way he wants, but he may not look at decisions and
reasons in similar cases from other states.
b. Moore must wait for the Colorado legislature and the governor to pass a law that addresses
the issues raised in the Cassidy case.
c. Moore must follow the California case if that is the best precedent.
d. Moore may follow the California case if he believes that it offers the best reasoning for a
similar case.
SELF -TEST ANSWERS
1. c
2. e
3. a
4. c
5. d
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
39
6. d
Chapter 2
Corporate Social Responsibility and Business Ethics
A great society is a society in which [leaders] of business think greatly about their functions.
Alfred North Whitehead
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to do the following:
1. Define ethics and explain the importance of good ethics for business people and business organizations.
2. Understand the principal philosophies of ethics, including utilitarianism, duty-based ethics, and virtue
ethics.
3. Distinguish between the ethical merits of various choices by using an ethical decision model.
4. Explain the difference between shareholder and stakeholder models of ethical corporate governance.
5. Explain why it is difficult to establish and maintain an ethical corporate culture in a business organization.
Few subjects are more contentious or important as the role of business in society, particularly, whether
corporations have social responsibilities that are distinct from maximizing shareholder value. While the
phrase “business ethics” is not oxymoronic (i.e., a contradiction in terms), there is plenty of evidence that
businesspeople and firms seek to look out primarily for themselves. However, business organizations
ignore the ethical and social expectations of consumers, employees, the media, nongovernment
organizations (NGOs), government officials, and socially responsible investors at their peril. Legal
compliance alone no longer serves the long-term interests of many companies, who find that sustainable
profitability requires thinking about people and the planet as well as profits.
This chapter has a fairly modest aim: to introduce potential businesspeople to the differences between
legal compliance and ethical excellence by reviewing some of the philosophical perspectives that apply to
business, businesspeople, and the role of business organizations in society.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
40
2.1 What Is Ethics?
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Explain how both individuals and institutions can be viewed as ethical or unethical.
2. Explain how law and ethics are different, and why a good reputation can be more important than legal
compliance.
Most of those who write about ethics do not make a clear distinction between ethics and morality. The
question of what is “right” or “morally correct” or “ethically correct” or “morally desirable” in any
situation is variously phrased, but all of the words and phrases are after the same thing: what act is
“better” in a moral or ethical sense than some other act? People sometimes speak of morality as
something personal but view ethics as having wider social implications. Others see morality as the subject
of a field of study, that field being ethics. Ethics would be morality as applied to any number of subjects,
including journalistic ethics, business ethics, or the ethics of professionals such as doctors, attorneys, and
accountants. We will venture a definition of ethics, but for our purposes, ethics and morality will be used
as equivalent terms.
People often speak about the ethics or morality of individuals and also about the morality or ethics of
corporations and nations. There are clearly differences in the kind of moral responsibility that we can
fairly ascribe to corporations and nations; we tend to see individuals as having a soul, or at least a
conscience, but there is no general agreement that nations or corporations have either. Still, our ordinary
use of language does point to something significant: if we say that some nations are “evil” and others are
“corrupt,” then we make moral judgments about the quality of actions undertaken by the governments or
people of that nation. For example, if North Korea is characterized by the US president as part of an “axis
of evil,” or if we conclude that WorldCom or Enron acted “unethically” in certain respects, then we are
making judgments that their collective actions are morally deficient.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
41
In talking about morality, we often use the word good; but that word can be confusing. If we say that
Microsoft is a “good company,” we may be making a statement about the investment potential of
Microsoft stock, or their preeminence in the market, or their ability to win lawsuits or appeals or to
influence administrative agencies. Less likely, though possibly, we may be making a statement about the
civic virtue and corporate social responsibility of Microsoft. In the first set of judgments, we use the
word good but mean something other than ethical or moral; only in the second instance are we using the
word good in its ethical or moral sense.
A word such as good can embrace ethical or moral values but also non-ethical values. If I like Daniel and
try to convince you what a “good guy” he is, you may ask all sorts of questions: Is he good-looking? Welloff? Fun to be with? Humorous? Athletic? Smart? I could answer all of those questions with a yes, yet you
would still not know any of his moral qualities. But if I said that he was honest, caring, forthright, and
diligent, volunteered in local soup kitchens, or tithed to the church, many people would see Daniel as
having certain ethical or moral qualities. If I said that he keeps the Golden Rule as well as anyone I know,
you could conclude that he is an ethical person. But if I said that he is “always in control” or “always at the
top of his game,” you would probably not make inferences or assumptions about his character or ethics.
There are three key points here:
1. Although morals and ethics are not precisely measurable, people generally have similar reactions
about what actions or conduct can rightly be called ethical or moral.
2. As humans, we need and value ethical people and want to be around them.
3. Saying that someone or some organization is law-abiding does not mean the same as saying a person
or company is ethical.
Here is a cautionary note: for individuals, it is far from easy to recognize an ethical problem, have a clear
and usable decision-making process to deal it, and then have the moral courage to do what’s right. All of
that is even more difficult within a business organization, where corporate employees vary in their
motivations, loyalties, commitments, and character. There is no universally accepted way for developing
an organization where employees feel valued, respected, and free to openly disagree; where the actions of
top management are crystal clear; and where all the employees feel loyal and accountable to one another.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
42
Before talking about how ethics relates to law, we can conclude that ethics is the study of morality—“right”
and “wrong”—in the context of everyday life, organizational behaviors, and even how society operates and
is governed.
How Do Law and Ethics Differ?
There is a difference between legal compliance and moral excellence. Few would choose a professional
service, health care or otherwise, because the provider had a record of perfect legal compliance, or always
following the letter of the law. There are many professional ethics codes, primarily because people realize
that law prescribes only a minimum of morality and does not provide purpose or goals that can mean
excellent service to customers, clients, or patients.
Business ethicists have talked for years about the intersection of law and ethics. Simply put, what is legal
is not necessarily ethical. Conversely, what is ethical is not necessarily legal. There are lots of legal
maneuvers that are not all that ethical; the well-used phrase “legal loophole” suggests as much.
Here are two propositions about business and ethics. Consider whether they strike you as true or whether
you would need to know more in order to make a judgment.
• Individuals and organizations have reputations. (For an individual, moral reputation is most often
tied to others’ perceptions of his or her character: is the individual honest, diligent, reliable, fair, and
caring? The reputation of an organization is built on the goodwill that suppliers, customers, the
community, and employees feel toward it. Although an organization is not a person in the usual sense,
the goodwill that people feel about the organization is based on their perception of its better qualities
by a variety of stakeholders: customers or clients, suppliers, investors, employees, government
officials).
• The goodwill of an organization is to a great extent based on the actions it takes and on whether the
actions are favorably viewed. (This goodwill is usually specifically counted in the sale of a business as
an asset that the buyer pays for. While it is difficult to place a monetary value on goodwill, a firm’s
good reputation will generally call for a higher evaluation in the final accounting before the sale. Legal
troubles or a reputation for having legal troubles will only lessen the price for a business and will even
lessen the value of the company’s stock as bad legal news comes to the public’s attention.)
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
43
Another reason to think about ethics in connection with law is that the laws themselves are meant to
express some moral view. If there are legal prohibitions against cheating the Medicare program, it is
because people (legislators or their agents) have collectively decided that cheating Medicare is wrong. If
there are legal prohibitions against assisting someone to commit suicide, it is because there has been a
group decision that doing so is immoral. Thus the law provides some important cues as to what society
regards as right or wrong.
Finally, important policy issues that face society are often resolved through law, but it is important to
understand the moral perspectives that underlie public debate—as, for example, in the continuing
controversies over stem-cell research, medical use of marijuana, and abortion. Some ethical perspectives
focus on rights, some on social utility, some on virtue or character, and some on social justice. People
consciously (or, more often, unconsciously) adopt one or more of these perspectives, and even if they
completely agree on the facts with an opponent, they will not change their views. Fundamentally, the
difference comes down to incompatible moral perspectives, a clash of basic values. These are hot-button
issues because society is divided, not so much over facts, but over basic values. Understanding the varied
moral perspectives and values in public policy debates is a clarifying benefit in following or participating
in these important discussions.
Why Should an Individual or a Business Entity Be Ethical?
The usual answer is that good ethics is good business. In the long run, businesses that pay attention to
ethics as well as law do better; they are viewed more favorably by customers. But this is a difficult claim to
measure scientifically, because “the long run” is an indistinct period of time and because there are as yet
no generally accepted criteria by which ethical excellence can be measured. In addition, life is still lived in
the short run, and there are many occasions when something short of perfect conduct is a lot more
profitable.
Some years ago, Royal Dutch/Shell (one of the world’s largest companies) found that it was in deep
trouble with the public for its apparent carelessness with the environment and human rights. Consumers
were boycotting and investors were getting frightened, so the company took a long, hard look at its ethic
of short-term profit maximization. Since then, changes have been made. The CEO told one group of
business ethicists that the uproar had taken them by surprise; they thought they had done everything 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
44
right, but it seemed there was a “ghost in the machine.” That ghost was consumers, NGOs, and the media,
all of whom objected to the company seems lack of moral sensitivity.
The market does respond to unethical behavior. In Section 2.4 "Corporations and Corporate Governance",
you will read about the Sears Auto Centers case. The loss of goodwill toward Sears Auto Centers was real,
even though the total amount of money lost cannot be clearly accounted for. Years later, there are people
who will not go near a Sears Auto Center; the customers who lost trust in the company will never return,
and many of their children may avoid Sears Auto Centers as well.
The Arthur Andersen story is even more dramatic. A major accounting firm, Andersen worked closely
with Enron in hiding its various losses through creative accounting measures. Suspiciously, Andersen’s
Houston office also did some shredding around the clock, appearing to cover up what it was doing for
Enron. A criminal case based on this shredding resulted in a conviction, later overturned by the Supreme
Court. But it was too late. Even before the conviction, many clients had found other accounting firms that
were not under suspicion, and the Supreme Court’s reversal came too late to save the company. Even
without the conviction, Andersen would have lost significant market share.
The irony of Andersen as a poster child for overly aggressive accounting practices is that the man who
founded the firm built it on integrity and straightforward practices. “Think straight, talk straight” was the
company’s motto. Andersen established the company’s reputation for integrity over a hundred years ago
by refusing to play numbers games for a potentially lucrative client.
Maximizing profits while being legally compliant is not a very inspiring goal for a business. People in an
organization need some quality or excellence to strive for. By focusing on pushing the edge of what is
legal, by looking for loopholes in the law that would help create short-term financial gain, companies have
often learned that in the long term they are not actually satisfying the market, the shareholders, the
suppliers, or the community generally.
KEY TAKEAWAY
Legal compliance is not the same as acting ethically. Your reputation, individually or corporately,
depends on how others regard your actions. Goodwill is hard to measure or quantify, but it is real
nonetheless and can best be protected by acting ethically.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
45
EXERCISES
1. Think of a person who did something morally wrong, at least to your way of thinking. What was it?
Explain to a friend of yours—or a classmate—why you think it was wrong. Does your friend agree?
Why or why not? What is the basic principle that forms the basis for your judgment that it was wrong?
2. Think of a person who did something morally right, at least to your way of thinking. (This is not a
matter of finding something they did well, like efficiently changing a tire, but something good.) What
was it? Explain to a friend of yours—or a classmate—why you think it was right. Does your friend
agree? Why or why not? What is the basic principle that forms the basis for your judgment that it was
right?
3. Think of an action by a business organization (sole proprietor, partnership, or corporation) that was
legal but still strikes you as wrong. What was it? Why do you think it was wrong?
4. Think of an act by an individual or a corporation that is ethical but not legal. Compare your answer
with those of your classmates: were you more likely to find an example from individual action or
corporate action? Do you have any thoughts as to why?
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
46
2.2 Major Ethical Perspectives
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Describe the various major theories about ethics in human decision making.
2. Begin considering how the major theories about ethics apply to difficult choices in life and business.
There are several well-respected ways of looking at ethical issues. Some of them have been around for
centuries. It is important to know that many who think a lot about business and ethics have deeply held
beliefs about which perspective is best. Others would recommend considering ethical problems from a
variety of different perspectives. Here, we take a brief look at (1) utilitarianism, (2) deontology, (3) social
justice and social contract theory, and (4) virtue theory. We are leaving out some important perspectives,
such as general theories of justice and “rights” and feminist thought about ethics and patriarchy.
Utilitarianism
Utilitarianism is a prominent perspective on ethics, one that is well aligned with economics and the freemarket outlook that has come to dominate much current thinking about business, management, and
economics. Jeremy Bentham is often considered the founder of utilitarianism, though John Stuart Mill
(who wrote On Liberty and Utilitarianism) and others promoted it as a guide to what is good.
Utilitarianism emphasizes not rules but results. An action (or set of actions) is generally deemed good or
right if it maximizes happiness or pleasure throughout society. Originally intended as a guide for
legislators charged with seeking the greatest good for society, the utilitarian outlook may also be practiced
individually and by corporations.
Bentham believed that the most promising way to obtain agreement on the best policies for a society
would be to look at the various policies a legislature could pass and compare the good and bad
consequences of each. The right course of action from an ethical point of view would be to choose the
policy that would produce the greatest amount of utility, or usefulness. In brief, the utilitarian principle 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
47
holds that an action is right if and only if the sum of utilities produced by that action is greater than the
sum of utilities from any other possible act.
This statement describes “act utilitarianism”—which action among various options will deliver the
greatest good to society? “Rule utilitarianism” is a slightly different version; it asks, what rule or principle,
if followed regularly, will create the greatest good?
Notice that the emphasis is on finding the best possible results and that the assumption is that we can
measure the utilities involved. (This turns out to be more difficult that you might think.) Notice also that
“the sum total of utilities” clearly implies that in doing utilitarian analysis, we cannot be satisfied if an act
or set of acts provides the greatest utility to us as individuals or to a particular corporation; the test is,
instead, whether it provides the greatest utility to society as a whole. Notice that the theory does not tell us
what kinds of utilities may be better than others or how much better a good today is compared with a
good a year from today.
Whatever its difficulties, utilitarian thinking is alive and well in US law and business. It is found in such
diverse places as cost-benefit analysis in administrative and regulatory rules and calculations,
environmental impact studies, the majority vote, and product comparisons for consumer information,
marketing studies, tax laws, and strategic planning. In management, people will often employ a form of
utility reasoning by projecting costs and benefits for plan X versus plan Y. But the issue in most of these
cost-benefit analyses is usually (1) put exclusively in terms of money and (2) directed to the benefit of the
person or organization doing the analysis and not to the benefit of society as a whole.
An individual or a company that consistently uses the test “What’s the greatest good for me or the
company?” is not following the utilitarian test of the greatest good overall. Another common failing is to
see only one or two options that seem reasonable. The following are some frequent mistakes that people
make in applying what they think are utilitarian principles in justifying their chosen course of action:
1. Failing to come up with lots of options that seem reasonable and then choosing the one that has the
greatest benefit for the greatest number. Often, a decision maker seizes on one or two alternatives
without thinking carefully about other courses of action. If the alternative does more good than harm,
the decision maker assumes it’s ethically okay.
2. Assuming that the greatest good for you or your company is in fact the greatest good for all—that is,
looking at situations subjectively or with your own interests primarily in mind.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
48
3. Underestimating the costs of a certain decision to you or your company. The now-classic Ford Pinto
case demonstrates how Ford Motor Company executives drastically underestimated the legal costs of
not correcting a feature on their Pinto models that they knew could cause death or injury. General
Motors was often taken to task by juries that came to understand that the company would not recall
or repair known and dangerous defects because it seemed more profitable not to. In 2010, Toyota
learned the same lesson.
4. Underestimating the cost or harm of a certain decision to someone else or some other group of
people.
5. Favoring short-term benefits, even though the long-term costs are greater.
6. Assuming that all values can be reduced to money. In comparing the risks to human health or safety
against, say, the risks of job or profit losses, cost-benefit analyses will often try to compare apples to
oranges and put arbitrary numerical values on human health and safety.
Rules and Duty: Deontology
In contrast to the utilitarian perspective, the deontological view presented in the writings of Immanuel
Kant purports that having a moral intent and following the right rules is a better path to ethical conduct
than achieving the right results. A deontologist like Kant is likely to believe that ethical action arises from
doing one’s duty and that duties are defined by rational thought. Duties, according to Kant, are not
specific to particular kinds of human beings but are owed universally to all human beings. Kant therefore
uses “universalizing “ as a form of rational thought that assumes the inherent equality of all human
beings. It considers all humans as equal, not in the physical, social, or economic sense, but equal before
God, whether they are male, female, Pygmy, Eskimoan, Islamic, Christian, gay, straight, healthy, sick,
young, or old.
For Kantian thinkers, this basic principle of equality means that we should be able to universalize any
particular law or action to determine whether it is ethical. For example, if you were to consider
misrepresenting yourself on a resume for a particular job you really wanted and you were convinced that
doing so would get you that job, you might be very tempted to do so. (What harm would it be? you might
ask yourself. When I have the job, I can prove that I was perfect for it, and no one is hurt, while both the
employer and I are clearly better off as a result!) Kantian ethicists would answer that your chosen course 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
49
of action should be a universal one—a course of action that would be good for all persons at all times.
There are two requirements for a rule of action to be universal: consistency and reversibility. Consider
reversibility: if you make a decision as though you didn’t know what role or position you would have after
the decision, you would more likely make an impartial one—you would more likely choose a course of
action that would be most fair to all concerned, not just you. Again, deontology requires that we put duty
first, act rationally, and give moral weight to the inherent equality of all human beings.
In considering whether to lie on your resume, reversibility requires you to actively imagine both that you
were the employer in this situation and that you were another well-qualified applicant who lost the job
because someone else padded his resume with false accomplishments. If the consequences of such an
exercise of the imagination are not appealing to you, your action is probably not ethical.
The second requirement for an action to be universal is the search for consistency. This is more abstract.
A deontologist would say that since you know you are telling a lie, you must be willing to say that lying, as
a general, universal phenomenon, is acceptable. But if everyone lied, then there would be no point to
lying, since no one would believe anyone. It is only because honesty works well for society as a whole and
is generally practiced that lying even becomes possible! That is, lying cannot be universalized, for it
depends on the preexistence of honesty.
Similar demonstrations can be made for actions such as polluting, breaking promises, and committing
most crimes, including rape, murder, and theft. But these are the easy cases for Kantian thinkers. In the
gray areas of life as it is lived, the consistency test is often difficult to apply. If breaking a promise would
save a life, then Kantian thought becomes difficult to apply. If some amount of pollution can allow
employment and the harm is minimal or distant, Kantian thinking is not all that helpful. Finally, we
should note that the well-known Golden Rule, “Do unto others as you would have them do unto you,”
emphasizes the easier of the two universalizing requirements: practicing reversibility (“How would I like it
if someone did this to me?”).
Social Justice Theory and Social Contract Theory
Social justice theorists worry about “distributive justice”—that is, what is the fair way to distribute goods
among a group of people? Marxist thought emphasizes that members of society should be given goods to
according to their needs. But this redistribution would require a governing power to decide who gets what 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
50
and when. Capitalist thought takes a different approach, rejecting any giving that is not voluntary. Certain
economists, such as the late Milton Friedman (see the sidebar in Section 2.4 "Corporations and Corporate
Governance") also reject the notion that a corporation has a duty to give to unmet needs in society,
believing that the government should play that role. Even the most dedicated free-market capitalist will
often admit the need for some government and some forms of welfare—Social Security, Medicare,
assistance to flood-stricken areas, help for AIDs patients—along with some public goods (such as defense,
education, highways, parks, and support of key industries affecting national security).
People who do not see the need for public goods (including laws, court systems, and the government
goods and services just cited) often question why there needs to be a government at all. One response
might be, “Without government, there would be no corporations.” Thomas Hobbes believed that people in
a “state of nature” would rationally choose to have some form of government. He called this
the social contract, where people give up certain rights to government in exchange for security and
common benefits. In your own lives and in this course, you will see an ongoing balancing act between
human desires for freedom and human desires for order; it is an ancient tension. Some commentators
also see a kind of social contract between corporations and society; in exchange for perpetual duration
and limited liability, the corporation has some corresponding duties toward society. Also, if a corporation
is legally a “person,” as the Supreme Court reaffirmed in 2010, then some would argue that if this
corporate person commits three felonies, it should be locked up for life and its corporate charter revoked!
Modern social contract theorists, such as Thomas Donaldson and Thomas Dunfee (Ties that Bind, 1999),
observe that various communities, not just nations, make rules for the common good. Your college or
school is a community, and there are communities within the school (fraternities, sororities, the folks
behind the counter at the circulation desk, the people who work together at the university radio station,
the sports teams, the faculty, the students generally, the gay and lesbian alliance) that have rules, norms,
or standards that people can buy into or not. If not, they can exit from that community, just as we are free
(though not without cost) to reject US citizenship and take up residence in another country.
Donaldson and Dunfee’s integrative social contracts theory stresses the importance of studying the rules
of smaller communities along with the larger social contracts made in states (such as Colorado or
California) and nation-states (such as the United States or Germany). Our Constitution can be seen as a
fundamental social contract.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
51
It is important to realize that a social contract can be changed by the participants in a community, just as
the US Constitution can be amended. Social contract theory is thus dynamic—it allows for structural and
organic changes. Ideally, the social contract struck by citizens and the government allows for certain
fundamental rights such as those we enjoy in the United States, but it need not. People can give up
freedom-oriented rights (such as the right of free speech or the right to be free of unreasonable searches
and seizures) to secure order (freedom from fear, freedom from terrorism). For example, many citizens in
Russia now miss the days when the Kremlin was all powerful; there was less crime and more equality and
predictability to life in the Soviet Union, even if there was less freedom.
Thus the rights that people have—in positive law—come from whatever social contract exists in the
society. This view differs from that of the deontologists and that of the natural-law thinkers such as
Gandhi, Jesus, or Martin Luther King Jr., who believed that rights come from God or, in less religious
terms, from some transcendent moral order.
Another important movement in ethics and society is the communitarian outlook. Communitarians
emphasize that rights carry with them corresponding duties; that is, there cannot be a right without a
duty. Interested students may wish to explore the work of Amitai Etzioni. Etzioni was a founder of the
Communitarian Network, which is a group of individuals who have come together to bolster the moral,
social, and political environment. It claims to be nonsectarian, nonpartisan, and international in scope.
The relationship between rights and duties—in both law and ethics—calls for some explanations:
1. If you have a right of free expression, the government has a duty to respect that right but can put
reasonable limits on it. For example, you can legally say whatever you want about the US president,
but you can’t get away with threatening the president’s life. Even if your criticisms are strong and
insistent, you have the right (and our government has the duty to protect your right) to speak freely.
In Singapore during the 1990s, even indirect criticisms—mere hints—of the political leadership were
enough to land you in jail or at least silence you with a libel suit.
2. Rights and duties exist not only between people and their governments but also between individuals.
Your right to be free from physical assault is protected by the law in most states, and when someone
walks up to you and punches you in the nose, your rights—as set forth in the positive law of your
state—have been violated. Thus other people have a duty to respect your rights and to not punch you
in the nose.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
52
3. Your right in legal terms is only as good as your society’s willingness to provide legal remedies
through the courts and political institutions of society.
A distinction between basic rights and non-basic rights may also be important. Basic rights may include
such fundamental elements as food, water, shelter, and physical safety. Another distinction is between
positive rights (the right to bear arms, the right to vote, the right of privacy) and negative rights (the right
to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures, the right to be free of cruel or unusual punishments).
Yet another is between economic or social rights (adequate food, work, and environment) and political or
civic rights (the right to vote, the right to equal protection of the laws, the right to due process).
Aristotle and Virtue Theory
Virtue theory, or virtue ethics, has received increasing attention over the past twenty years, particularly in
contrast to utilitarian and deontological approaches to ethics. Virtue theory emphasizes the value of
virtuous qualities rather than formal rules or useful results. Aristotle is often recognized as the first
philosopher to advocate the ethical value of certain qualities, or virtues, in a person’s character. As LaRue
Hosmer has noted, Aristotle saw the goal of human existence as the active, rational search for excellence,
and excellence requires the personal virtues of honesty, truthfulness, courage, temperance, generosity,
and high-mindedness. This pursuit is also termed “knowledge of the good” in Greek philosophy. [1]
Aristotle believed that all activity was aimed at some goal or perceived well and that there must be some
ranking that we do among those goals or goods. Happiness may be our ultimate goal, but what does that
mean, exactly? Aristotle rejected wealth, pleasure, and fame and embraced reason as the distinguishing
feature of humans, as opposed to other species. And since a human is a reasoning animal, happiness must
be associated with reason. Thus happiness is living according to the active (rather than passive) use of
reason. The use of reason leads to excellence, and so happiness can be defined as the active, rational
pursuit of personal excellence, or virtue.
Aristotle named fourteen virtues: (1) courage, particularly in battle; (2) temperance, or moderation in
eating and drinking; (3) liberality, or spending money well; (4) magnificence, or living well; (5) pride, or
taking pleasure in accomplishments and stature; (6) high-mindedness, or concern with the noble rather
than the petty; (7) unnamed virtue, which is halfway between ambition and total lack of effort; (8)
gentleness, or concern for others; (9) truthfulness; (10) wit, or pleasure in group discussions; (11) 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
53
friendliness, or pleasure in personal conduct; (12) modesty, or pleasure in personal conduct; (13)
righteous indignation, or getting angry at the right things and in the right amounts; and (14) justice.
From a modern perspective, some of these virtues seem old-fashioned or even odd. Magnificence, for
example, is not something we commonly speak of. Three issues emerge: (1) How do we know what a virtue
is these days? (2) How useful is a list of agreed-upon virtues anyway? (3) What do virtues have to do with
companies, particularly large ones where various groups and individuals may have little or no contact
with other parts of the organization?
As to the third question, whether corporations can “have” virtues or values is a matter of lively debate. A
corporation is obviously not the same as an individual. But there seems to be growing agreement that
organizations do differ in their practices and that these practices are value driven. If all a company cares
about is the bottom line, other values will diminish or disappear. Quite a few books have been written in
the past twenty years that emphasize the need for businesses to define their values in order to be
competitive in today’s global economy. [2]
As to the first two questions regarding virtues, a look at Michael Josephson’s core values may prove
helpful.
Josephson’s Core Values Analysis and Decision Process
Michael Josephson, a noted American ethicist, believes that a current set of core values has been
identified and that the values can be meaningfully applied to a variety of personal and corporate
decisions.
To simplify, let’s say that there are ethical and non-ethical qualities among people in the United States.
When you ask people what kinds of qualities they admire in others or in themselves, they may say wealth,
power, fitness, sense of humor, good looks, intelligence, musical ability, or some other quality. They may
also value honesty, caring, fairness, courage, perseverance, diligence, trustworthiness, or integrity. The
qualities on the second list have something in common—they are distinctively ethical characteristics. That
is, they are commonly seen as moral or ethical qualities, unlike the qualities on the first list. You can be,
like the Athenian Alcibiades, brilliant but unprincipled, or, like some political leaders today, powerful but
dishonest, or wealthy but uncaring. You can, in short, have a number of admirable qualities (brilliance,
power, wealth) that are not per se virtuous. Just because Harold is rich or good-looking or has a good 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
54
sense of humor does not mean that he is ethical. But if Harold is honest and caring (whether he is rich or
poor, humorous or humorless), people are likely to see him as ethical.
Among the virtues, are any especially important? Studies from the Josephson Institute of Ethics in
Marina del Rey, California, have identified six core values in our society, values that almost everyone
agrees are important to them. When asked what values people hold dear, what values they wish to be
known by, and what values they wish others would exhibit in their actions, six values consistently turn up:
(1) trustworthiness, (2) respect, (3) responsibility, (4) fairness, (5) caring, and (6) citizenship.
Note that these values are distinctly ethical. While many of us may value wealth, good looks, and
intelligence, having wealth, good looks, and intelligence does not automatically make us virtuous in our
character and habits. But being more trustworthy (by being honest and by keeping promises) does make
us more virtuous, as does staying true to the other five core values.
Notice also that these six core values share something in common with other ethical values that are less
universally agreed upon. Many values taught in the family or in places of worship are not generally agreed
on, practiced, or admired by all. Some families and individuals believe strongly in the virtue of saving
money or in abstaining from alcohol or sex prior to marriage. Others clearly do not, or at least don’t act on
their beliefs. Moreover, it is possible to have and practice core ethical values even if you take on heavy
debt, knock down several drinks a night, or have frequent premarital sex. Some would dispute this, saying
that you can’t really lead a virtuous life if you get into debt, drink heavily, or engage in premarital sex. But
the point here is that since people do disagree in these areas, the ethical traits of thrift, temperance, and
sexual abstinence do not have the unanimity of approval that the six core values do.
The importance of an individual’s having these consistent qualities of character is well known. Often we
remember the last bad thing a person did far more than any or all previous good acts. For example, Eliot
Spitzer and Bill Clinton are more readily remembered by people for their last, worst acts than for any good
they accomplished as public servants. As for a company, its good reputation also has an incalculable value
that when lost takes a great deal of time and work to recover. Shell, Nike, and other companies have
discovered that there is a market for morality, however difficult to measure, and that not paying attention
to business ethics often comes at a serious price. In the past fifteen years, the career of ethics and
compliance officer has emerged, partly as a result of criminal proceedings against companies but also
because major companies have found that reputations cannot be recovered retroactively but must be 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
55
pursued proactively. For individuals, Aristotle emphasized the practice of virtue to the point where virtue
becomes a habit. Companies are gradually learning the same lesson.
KEY TAKEAWAY
Throughout history, people have pondered what it means “to do what is right.” Some of the main
answers have come from the differing perspectives of utilitarian thought; duty-based, or deontological,
thought; social contract theory; and virtue ethics.
EXERCISES
XYZ Motor Corporation begins to get customer complaints about two models of its automobiles.
Customers have had near-death experiences from sudden acceleration; they would be driving along a
highway at normal speed when suddenly the car would begin to accelerate and efforts to stop the
acceleration by braking fail to work. Drivers could turn off the ignition and come to a safe stop, but XYZ
does not instruct buyers of its cars to do so, nor is this a common reaction among drivers who
experience sudden acceleration.
Internal investigations of half a dozen accidents in US locations come to the conclusion that the
accidents are not being caused by drivers who mistake the gas pedal for the brake pedal. In fact, there
appears to be a possible flaw in both models, perhaps in a semiconductor chip, that makes sudden
acceleration happen. Interference by floor mats and poorly designed gas pedals do not seem to be the
problem.
It is voluntary to report these incidents to the National Highway Traffic and Safety Administration
(NHTSA), but the company decides that it will wait awhile and see if there are more complaints.
Recalling the two models so that local dealers and their mechanics could examine them is also an
option, but it would be extremely costly. Company executives are aware that quarterly and annual
profit-and-loss statements, on which their bonuses depend, could be decisively worse with a recall. 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
56
They decide that on a cost-benefit basis, it makes more sense to wait until there are more accidents
and more data. After a hundred or more accidents and nearly fifteen fatalities, the company institutes
a selective recall, still not notifying NHTSA, which has its own experts and the authority to order XYZ to
do a full recall of all affected models.
Experts have advised XYZ that standard failure-analysis methodology requires that the company obtain
absolutely every XYZ vehicle that has experienced sudden acceleration, using microscopic analysis of all
critical components of the electronic system. The company does not wish to take that advice, as it
would be—as one top executive put it—“too time-consuming and expensive.”
1. Can XYZ’s approach to this problem be justified under utilitarian theory? If so, how? If not, why not?
2. What would Kant advise XYZ to do? Explain.
3. What would the “virtuous” approach be for XYZ in this situation?
[1] LaRue Tone Hosmer, Moral Leadership in Business (Chicago: Irwin Professional Publishing, 1994), 72.
[2] James O’Toole and Don Mayer, eds., Good Business: Exercising Effective and Ethical Leadership (London: 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
57
2.3 An Ethical Decision Model
LEARNING OBJECTIVE
1. Understand one model for ethical decision making: a process to arrive at the most ethical option for
an individual or a business organization, using a virtue ethics approach combined with some elements
of stakeholder analysis and utilitarianism.
Josephson’s Core Values Model
Once you recognize that there is a decision that involves ethical judgment, Michael Josephson would first
have you ask as many questions as are necessary to get a full background on the relevant facts. Then,
assuming you have all the needed information, the decision process is as follows:
1. Identify the stakeholders. That is, who are the potential gainers and losers in the various decisions
that might be made here?
2. Identify several likely or reasonable decisions that could be made.
3. Consider which stakeholders gain or lose with each decision.
4. Determine which decision satisfies the greatest number of core values.
5. If there is no decision that satisfies the greatest number of core values, try to determine which
decision delivers the greatest good to the various stakeholders.
It is often helpful to identify who (or what group) is the most important stakeholder, and why. In Milton
Friedman’s view, it will always be the shareholders. In the view of John Mackey, the CEO of Whole Foods
Market, the long-term viability and profitability of the organization may require that customers come
first, or, at times, some other stakeholder group (see “Conscious Capitalism” in Section 2.4 "Corporations
and Corporate Governance").
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
58
The Core Values
Here are the core values and their subcomponents as developed by the Josephson Institute of Ethics.
Trustworthiness: Be honest—tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth; be
sincere, forthright; don’t deceive, mislead, or be tricky with the truth; don’t cheat or steal, and
don’t betray a trust. Demonstrate integrity—stand up for what you believe, walk the walk as
well as talking the talk; be what you seem to be; show commitment and courage. Be loyal—
stand by your family, friends, co-workers, community, and nation; be discreet with
information that comes into your hands; don’t spread rumors or engage in harmful gossip;
don’t violate your principles just to win friendship or approval; don’t ask a friend to do
something that is wrong. Keep promises—keep your word, honor your commitments, and pay
your debts; return what you borrow.
Respect: Judge people on their merits, not their appearance; be courteous, polite,
appreciative, and accepting of differences; respect others’ right to make decisions about their
own lives; don’t abuse, demean, mistreat anyone; don’t use, manipulate, exploit, or take
advantage of others.
Responsibility: Be accountable—think about the consequences on yourself and others likely
to be affected before you act; be reliable; perform your duties; take responsibility for the
consequences of your choices; set a good example and don’t make excuses or take credit for
other people’s work. Pursue excellence: Do your best, don’t quit easily, persevere, be diligent,
make all you do worthy of pride. Exercise self-restraint—be disciplined, know the difference
between what you have a right to do and what is right to do.
Fairness: Treat all people fairly, be open-minded; listen; consider opposing viewpoints; be
consistent; use only appropriate considerations; don’t let personal feelings improperly
interfere with decisions; don’t take unfair advantage of mistakes; don’t take more than your
fair share.
Caring: Show you care about others through kindness, caring, sharing, compassion, and
empathy; treat others the way you want to be treated; don’t be selfish, mean, cruel, or
insensitive to others’ feelings.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
59
Citizenship: Play by the rules, obey laws; do your share, respect authority, stay informed,
vote, protect your neighbors, pay your taxes; be charitable, help your community; protect the
environment, conserve resources.
When individuals and organizations confront ethical problems, the core values decision model offered by
Josephson generally works well (1) to clarify the gains and losses of the various stakeholders, which then
raises ethical awareness on the part of the decision maker and (2) to provide a fairly reliable guide as to
what the most ethical decision would be. In nine out of ten cases, step 5 in the decision process is not
needed.
That said, it does not follow that students (or managers) would necessarily act in accord with the results of
the core values decision process. There are many psychological pressures and organizational constraints
that place limits on people both individually and in organizations. These pressures and constraints tend to
compromise ideal or the most ethical solutions for individuals and for organizations. For a business, one
essential problem is that ethics can cost the organization money or resources, at least in the short term.
Doing the most ethical thing will often appear to be something that fails to maximize profits in the short
term or that may seem pointless because if you or your organization acts ethically, others will not, and
society will be no better off, anyway.
KEY TAKEAWAY
Having a step-by-step process to analyze difficult moral dilemmas is useful. One such process is offered
here, based on the core values of trustworthiness, caring, respect, fairness, responsibility, and
citizenship.
EXERCISE
1. Consider XYZ in the exercises for Section 2.2.5 "Josephson’s Core Values Analysis and Decision
Process" and use the core values decision-making model. What are XYZ’s options when they first
notice that two of their models are causing sudden acceleration incidents that put their customers at
risk? Who are the stakeholders? What options most clearly meet the criteria for each of the core
values?
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
60
2.4 Corporations and Corporate Governance
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Explain the basic structure of the typical corporation and how the shareholders own the company and
elect directors to run it.
2. Understand how the shareholder profit-maximization model is different from stakeholder theory.
3. Discern and describe the ethical challenges for corporate cultures.
4. Explain what conscious capitalism is and how it differs from stakeholder theory.
Legal Organization of the Corporation
Figure 2.1 Corporate Legal Structure
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
61
Figure 2.1 "Corporate Legal Structure", though somewhat oversimplified, shows the basic legal structure
of a corporation under Delaware law and the laws of most other states in the United States. Shareholders
elect directors, who then hire officers to manage the company. From this structure, some very basic
realities follow. Because the directors of a corporation do not meet that often, it’s possible for the officers
hired (top management, or the “C-suite”) to be selective of what the board knows about, and directors are
not always ready and able to provide the oversight that the shareholders would like. Nor does the law
require officers to be shareholders, so that officers’ motivations may not align with the best interests of the
company. This is the “agency problem” often discussed in corporate governance: how to get officers and
other top management to align their own interests with those of the shareholders. For example, a CEO
might trade insider information to the detriment of the company’s shareholders. Even board members are
susceptible to misalignment of interest; for example, board members might resist hostile takeover bids
because they would likely lose their perks (short for perquisites) as directors, even though the tender offer
would benefit stockholders. Among other attempted realignments, the use of stock options was an
attempt to make managers more attentive to the value of company stock, but the law of unintended
consequences was in full force; managers tweaked and managed earnings in the bubble of the 1990s bull
market, and “managing by numbers” became an epidemic in corporations organized under US corporate
law. The rights of shareholders can be bolstered by changes in state and federal law, and there have been
some attempts to do that since the late 1990s. But as owners, shareholders have the ultimate power to
replace nonperforming or underperforming directors, which usually results in changes at the C-suite level
as well.
Shareholders and Stakeholders
There are two main views about what the corporation’s duties are. The first view—maximizing profits—is
the prevailing view among business managers and in business schools. This view largely follows the idea
of Milton Friedman that the duty of a manager is to maximize return on investment to the owners. In
essence, managers’ legally prescribed duties are those that make their employment possible. In terms of
the legal organization of the corporation, the shareholders elect directors who hire managers, who have
legally prescribed duties toward both directors and shareholders. Those legally prescribed duties are a
reflection of the fact that managers are managing other people’s money and have a moral duty to act as a 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
62
responsible agent for the owners. In law, this is called the manager’s fiduciary duty. Directors have the
same duties toward shareholders. Friedman emphasized the primacy of this duty in his writings about
corporations and social responsibility.
Maximizing Profits: Milton Friedman
Economist Milton Friedman is often quoted as having said that the only moral duty a corporation has is to
make the most possible money, or to maximize profits, for its stockholders. Friedman’s beliefs are noted
at length (see sidebar on Friedman’s article from the New York Times), but he asserted in a now-famous
1970 article that in a free society, “there is one and only one social responsibility of business: to use its
resources and engage in activities designed to increase its profits as long as it stays within the rules of the
game, which is to say, engages in open and free competition without deception and fraud.” What follows is
a major portion of what Friedman had to say in 1970.
“The Social Responsibility of Business Is to Increase Its Profits”
Milton Friedman, New York Times Magazine, September 13, 1970
What does it mean to say that “business” has responsibilities? Only people can have
responsibilities. A corporation is an artificial person and in this sense may have artificial
responsibilities, but “business” as a whole cannot be said to have responsibilities, even in this
vague sense.…
Presumably, the individuals who are to be responsible are a businessman, which means
individual proprietors or corporate executives…In a free enterprise, private-property system;
a corporate executive is an employee of the owners of the business. He has direct responsibility
to his employers. That responsibility is to conduct the business in accordance with their
desires, which generally will be to make as much money as possible while conforming to the
basic rules of the society, both those embodied in law and those embodied in ethical custom.…
… [T]he manager is that agent of the individuals who own the corporation or establish the
eleemosynary institution, and his primary responsibility is to them…
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
63
Of course, the corporate executive is also a person in his own right. As a person, he may have
other responsibilities that he recognizes or assumes voluntarily—to his family, his conscience,
his feeling of charity, his church, his clubs, his city, his country. He may feel impelled by these
responsibilities to devote part of his income to causes he regards as worthy, to refuse to work
for particular corporations, even to leave his job…But in these respects he is acting as a
principal, not an agent; he is spending his own money or time or energy, not the money of his
employers or the time or energy he has contracted to devote to their purposes. If these are
“social responsibilities,” they are the social responsibilities of individuals, not of business.
What does it mean to say that the corporate executive has a “social responsibility” in his
capacity as businessman? If this statement is not pure rhetoric, it must mean that he has to act
in some way that is not in the interest of his employers. For example, that he is to refrain from
increasing the price of the product in order to contribute to the social objective of preventing
inflation, even though a price increase would be in the best interests of the corporation. Or
that he is to make expenditures on reducing pollution beyond the amount that is in the best
interests of the corporation or that is required by law in order to contribute to the social
objective of improving the environment. Or that, at the expense of corporate profits, he is to
hire “hardcore” unemployed instead of better qualified available workmen to contribute to the
social objective of reducing poverty.
In each of these cases, the corporate executive would be spending someone else’s money for a
general social interest. Insofar as his actions…reduce returns to stockholders, he is spending
their money. Insofar as his actions raise the price to customers, he is spending the customers’
money. Insofar as his actions lower the wages of some employees, he is spending their money.
This process raises political questions on two levels: principle and consequences. On the level
of political principle, the imposition of taxes and the expenditure of tax proceeds are
governmental functions. We have established elaborate constitutional, parliamentary, and
judicial provisions to control these functions, to assure that taxes are imposed so far as
possible in accordance with the preferences and desires of the public.…
Others have challenged the notion that corporate managers have no real duties except toward the owners
(shareholders). By changing two letters in shareholder, stakeholder theorists widened the range of people 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
64
and institutions that a corporation should pay moral consideration to. Thus they contend that a
corporation, through its management, has a set of responsibilities toward non-shareholder interests.
Stakeholder Theory
Stakeholders of a corporation include its employees, suppliers, customers, and the community.
Stakeholder is a deliberate play on the word shareholder, to emphasize that corporations have obligations
that extend beyond the bottom-line aim of maximizing profits. A stakeholder is anyone who most would
agree is significantly affected (positively or negatively) by the decision of another moral agent.
There is one vital fact about corporations: the corporation is a creation of the law. Without law (and
government), corporations would not have existence. The key concept for corporations is the legal fact of
limited liability. The benefit of limited liability for shareholders of a corporation meant that larger pools of
capital could be aggregated for larger enterprises; shareholders could only lose their investments should
the venture fail in any way, and there would be no personal liability and thus no potential loss of personal
assets other than the value of the corporate stock. Before New Jersey and Delaware competed to make
incorporation as easy as possible and beneficial to the incorporators and founders, those who wanted the
benefits of incorporation had to go to legislatures—usually among the states—to show a public purpose
that the company would serve.
In the late 1800s, New Jersey and Delaware changed their laws to make incorporating relatively easy.
These two states allowed incorporation “for any legal purpose,” rather than requiring some public
purpose. Thus it is government (and its laws) that makes limited liability happen through the corporate
form. That is, only through the consent of the state and armed with the charter granted by the state can a
corporation’s shareholders have limited liability. This is a right granted by the state, a right granted for
good and practical reasons for encouraging capital and innovation. But with this right comes a related
duty, not clearly stated at law, but assumed when a charter is granted by the state: that the corporate form
of doing business is legal because the government feels that it socially useful to do so.
Implicitly, then, there is a social contract between governments and corporations: as long as corporations
are considered socially useful, they can exist. But do they have explicit social responsibilities? Milton
Friedman’s position suggests that having gone along with legal duties; the corporation can ignore any
other social obligations. But there are others (such as advocates of stakeholder theory) who would say that 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
65
a corporation’s social responsibilities go beyond just staying within the law and go beyond the
corporation’s shareholders to include a number of other important stakeholders, those whose lives can be
affected by corporate decisions.
According to stakeholder theorists, corporations (and other business organizations) must pay attention
not only to the bottom line but also to their overall effect on the community. Public perception of a
company’s unfairness, uncaring, disrespect, or lack of trustworthiness often leads to long-term failure,
whatever the short-term successes or profits may be. A socially responsible corporation is likely to
consider the impact of its decisions on a wide range of stakeholders, not just shareholders. As Table 2.1
"The Stakes of Various Stakeholders" indicates, stakeholders have very different kinds of interests
(“stakes”) in the actions of a corporation.
Table 2.1 The Stakes of Various Stakeholders
Ownership
The value of the organization has a direct impact on the wealth of these
stakeholders.
Managers
Directors who
own stock
Shareholders
Economic
Dependence
Stakeholders can be economically dependent without having ownership.
Each of these stakeholders relies on the corporation in some way for
financial well-being.
Salaried
managers
Creditors
Suppliers
Employees
Local
communities
Social Interests
These stakeholders are not directly linked to the organization but have
an interest in making sure the organization acts in a socially responsible
manner.
Communities
Government
Media
Corporate Culture and Codes of Ethics
A corporation is a “person” capable of suing, being sued, and having rights and duties in our legal system.
(It is a legal or juridical person, not a natural person, according to our Supreme Court.) Moreover, many
corporations have distinct cultures and beliefs that are lived and breathed by its members. Often, the 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
66
culture of a corporation is the best defense against individuals within that firm who may be tempted to
break the law or commit serious ethical misdeeds.
What follows is a series of observations about corporations, ethics, and corporate culture.
Ethical Leadership Is Top-Down
People in an organization tend to watch closely what the top managers do and say. Regardless of
managers’ talk about ethics, employees quickly learn what speech or actions are in fact rewarded. If the
CEO is firm about acting ethically, others in the organization will take their cues from him or her. People
at the top tend to set the target, the climate, the beliefs, and the expectations that fuel behavior.
Accountability Is Often Weak
Clever managers can learn to shift blame to others, take credit for others’ work, and move on before
“funny numbers” or other earnings management tricks come to light. [1] Again, we see that the manager is
often an agent for himself or herself and will often act more in his or her self-interest than for the
corporate interest.
Killing the Messenger
Where organizations no longer function, inevitably some employees are unhappy. If they call attention to
problems that are being covered up by coworkers or supervisors, they bring bad news. Managers like to
hear good news and discourage bad news. Intentionally or not, those who told on others, or blew the
whistle, have rocked the boat and become unpopular with those whose defalcations they report on and
with the managers who don’t really want to hear the bad news. In many organizations, “killing the
messenger” solves the problem. Consider James Alexander at Enron Corporation, who was deliberately
shut out after bringing problems to CEO Ken Lay’s attention. [2] When Sherron Watkins sent Ken Lay a
letter warning him about Enron’s accounting practices, CFO Andrew Fastow tried to fire her. [3]
Ethics Codes
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
67
Without strong leadership and a willingness to listen to bad news as well as good news, managers do not
have the feedback necessary to keep the organization healthy. Ethics codes have been put in place—partly
in response to federal sentencing guidelines and partly to encourage feedback loops to top management.
The best ethics codes are aspirational, or having an ideal to be pursued, not legalistic or compliance
driven. The Johnson & Johnson ethics code predated the Tylenol scare and the company’s oft-celebrated
corporate response. [4] The corporate response was consistent with that code, which was lived and
modeled by the top of the organization.
It’s often noted that a code of ethics is only as important as top management is willing to make it. If the
code is just a document that goes into a drawer or onto a shelf, it will not effectively encourage good
conduct within the corporation. The same is true of any kind of training that the company undertakes,
whether it be in racial sensitivity or sexual harassment. If the message is not continuously reinforced, or
(worse yet) if the message is undermined by management’s actions, the real message to employees is that
violations of the ethics code will not be taken seriously, or that efforts to stop racial discrimination or
sexual harassment are merely token efforts, and that the important things are profits and performance.
The ethics code at Enron seems to have been one of those “3-P” codes that wind up sitting on shelves—
“Print, Post, and Pray.” Worse, the Enron board twice suspended the code in 1999 to allow outside
partnerships to be led by a top Enron executive who stood to gain financially from them. [5]
Ethics Hotlines and Federal Sentencing Guidelines
The federal sentencing guidelines were enacted in 1991. The original idea behind these guidelines was for
Congress to correct the lenient treatment often given to white-collar, or corporate, criminals. The
guidelines require judges to consider “aggravating and mitigating” factors in determining sentences and
fines. (While corporations cannot go to jail, its officers and managers certainly can, and the corporation
itself can be fined. Many companies will claim that it is one bad apple that has caused the problem; the
guidelines invite these companies to show that they are in fact tending their orchard well. They can show
this by providing evidence that they have (1) a viable, active code of ethics; (2) a way for employees to
report violations of law or the ethics code; and (3) an ethics ombudsman, or someone who oversees the
code.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
68
In short, if a company can show that it has an ongoing process to root out wrongdoing at all levels of the
company; the judge is allowed to consider this as a major mitigating factor in the fines the company will
pay. Most Fortune 500 companies have ethics hotlines and processes in place to find legal and ethical
problems within the company.
Managing by the Numbers
If you manage by the numbers, there is a temptation to lie about those numbers, based on the need to get
stock price ever higher. At Enron, “15 percent a year or better earnings growth” was the mantra. Jeffrey
Pfeffer, professor of organizational behavior at Stanford University, observes how the belief that “stock
price is all that matters” has been hardwired into the corporate psyche. It dictates not only how people
judge the worth of their company but also how they feel about themselves and the work that they are
doing. And, over time, it has clouded judgments about what is acceptable corporate behavior. [6]
Managing by Numbers: The Sears Auto Center Story
If winning is the most important thing in your life, then you must be prepared to do anything
to win.
—Michael Josephson
Most people want to be winners or associate with winners. As humans, our desire to associate with those
who have status provides plenty of incentive to glorify winners and ignore losers. But if an individual, a
team, or a company does whatever it takes to win, then all other values are thrown out in the goal to win
at all costs. The desire of some people within Sears & Roebuck Company’s auto repair division to win by
gaining higher profits resulted in the situation portrayed here.
Sears Roebuck & Company has been a fixture in American retailing throughout the twentieth
century. At one time, people in rural America could order virtually anything (including a
house) from Sears. Not without some accuracy, the company billed itself as “the place where
Americans shop.” But in 1992, Sears was charged by California authorities with gross and
deliberate fraud in many of its auto centers.
The authorities were alerted by a 50 percent increase in consumer complaints over a threeyear period. New Jersey’s division of consumer affairs also investigated Sears Auto Centers 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
69
and found that all six visited by investigators had recommended unnecessary repairs.
California’s department of consumer affairs found that Sears had systematically overcharged
by an average of $223 for repairs and routinely billed for work that was not done. Sears Auto
Centers were the largest providers of auto repair services in the state.
The scam was a variant on the old bait-and-switch routine. Customers received coupons in the
mail inviting them to take advantage of hefty discounts on brake jobs. When customers came
in to redeem their coupons, sales staffers would convince them to authorize additional repairs.
As a management tool, Sears had also established quotas for each of their sales
representatives to meet.
Ultimately, California got Sears to settle a large number of lawsuits against it by threatening
to revoke Sears’ auto repair license. Sears agreed to distribute $50 coupons to nearly a million
customers nationwide who had obtained certain services between August 1, 1990, and
January 31, 1992. Sears also agreed to pay $3.5 million to cover the costs of various
government investigations and to contribute $1.5 million annually to conduct auto mechanic
training programs. It also agreed to abandon its repair service quotas. The entire settlement
cost Sears $30 million. Sears Auto Center sales also dropped about 15 to 20 percent after news
of the scandal broke.
Note that in boosting sales by performing unnecessary services, Sears suffered very bad publicity. Losses
were incalculable. The short-term gains were easy to measure; long-term consequences seldom are. The
case illustrates a number of important lessons:
• People generally choose short-term gains over potential long-term losses.
• People often justify the harm to others as being minimal or “necessary” to achieve the desired sales
quota or financial goal.
• In working as a group, we often form an “us versus them” mentality. In the Sears case, it is likely that
Sears “insiders” looked at customers as “outsiders,” effectively treating them (in Kantian terms) as
means rather than ends in themselves. In short, outsiders were used for the benefit of insiders.
• The long-term losses to Sears are difficult to quantify, while the short-term gains were easy to
measure and (at least for a brief while) quite satisfying financially.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
70
• Sears’ ongoing rip-offs were possible only because individual consumers lacked the relevant
information about the service being offered. This lack of information is a market failure, since many
consumers were demanding more of Sears Auto Center services than they would have (and at a higher
price) if relevant information had been available to them earlier. Sears, like other sellers of goods and
services, took advantage of a market system, which, in its ideal form, would not permit such
information distortions.
• People in the organization probably thought that the actions they took were necessary.
Noting this last point, we can assume that these key people were motivated by maximizing profits and had
lost sight of other goals for the organization.
The emphasis on doing whatever is necessary to win is entirely understandable, but it is not ethical. The
temptation will always exist—for individuals, companies, and nations—to dominate or to win and to write
the history of their actions in a way that justifies or overlooks the harm that has been done. In a way, this
fits with the notion that “might make right,” or that power is the ultimate measure of right and wrong.
Conscious Capitalism
One effort to integrate the two viewpoints of stakeholder theory and shareholder primacy is the conscious
capitalism movement. Companies that practice conscious capitalism embrace the idea that profit and
prosperity can and must go hand in hand with social justice and environmental stewardship. They operate
with a holistic or systems view. This means that they understand that all stakeholders are connected and
interdependent. They reject false trade-offs between stakeholder interests and strive for creative ways to
achieve win-win-win outcomes for all. [7]
The “conscious business” has a purpose that goes beyond maximizing profits. It is designed to maximize
profits but is focused more on its higher purpose and does not fixate solely on the bottom line. To do so, it
focuses on delivering value to all its stakeholders, harmonizing as best it can the interests of consumers,
partners, investors, the community, and the environment. This requires that company managers take a
“servant leadership” role, serving as stewards to the company’s deeper purpose and to the company’s
stakeholders.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
71
Conscious business leaders serve as such stewards, focusing on fulfilling the company’s purpose,
delivering value to its stakeholders, and facilitating a harmony of interests, rather than on personal gain
and self-aggrandizement. Why is this refocusing needed? Within the standard profit-maximizing model,
corporations have long had to deal with the “agency problem.” Actions by top-level managers—acting on
behalf of the company—should align with the shareholders, but in a culture all about winning and money,
managers sometimes act in ways that are self-aggrandizing and that do not serve the interests of
shareholders. Laws exist to limit such self-aggrandizing, but the remedies are often too little and too late
and often catch only the most egregious overreaching. Having a culture of servant leadership is a much
better way to see that a company’s top management works to ensure a harmony of interests.
[1] See Robert Jackall, Moral Mazes: The World of Corporate Managers (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988).
[2] John Schwartz, “An Enron Unit Chief Warned, and Was Rebuffed,” New York Times, February 20, 2002.
[3] Warren Bennis, “A Corporate Fear of Too Much Truth,” New York Times, February 17, 2002.
[4] University of Oklahoma Department of Defense Joint Course in Communication, Case Study: The Johnson &
Johnson Tylenol Crisis, accessed April 5, 2011.
[5] FindLaw, Report of Investigation by the Special Investigative Committee of the Board of Directors of Enron Corp.,
February 1, 2002, accessed April 5, 2011,http://news.findlaw.com/wsj/docs/enron/sicreport.
[6] Steven Pearlstein, “Debating the Enron Effect,” Washington Post, February 17, 2002.
[7] Milton Friedman, John Mackey, and T. J. Rodgers, “Rethinking the Social Responsibility of Business,”
Reason.com, October 2005,http://reason.com/archives/2005/10/01/rethinking-the-social-responsi.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
72
2.5 Summary and Exercises
Summary
Doing good business requires attention to ethics as well as law. Understanding the long-standing
perspectives on ethics—utilitarianism, deontology, social contract, and virtue ethics—is helpful in sorting
out the ethical issues that face us as individuals and businesses. Each business needs to create or maintain
a culture of ethical excellence, where there is ongoing dialogue not only about the best technical practices
but also about the company’s ethical challenges and practices. A firm that has purpose and passion
beyond profitability is best poised to meet the needs of diverse stakeholders and can best position itself
for long-term, sustainable success for shareholders and other stakeholders as well.
EXERCISES
1. Consider again Milton Friedman’s article.
a. What does Friedman mean by “ethical custom”?
b. If the laws of the society are limiting the company’s profitability, would the company be within
its rights to disobey the law?
c. What if the law is “on the books,” but the company could count on a lack of enforcement from
state officials who were overworked and underpaid? Should the company limit its profits? 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
73
Suppose that it could save money by discharging a pollutant into a nearby river, adversely
affecting fish and, potentially, drinking water supplies for downstream municipalities. In
polluting against laws that aren’t enforced, is it still acting “within the rules of the game”?
What if almost all other companies in the industry were saving money by doing similar acts?
Consider again the Harris v. Forklift case at the end of Chapter 1 "Introduction to Law and
Legal Systems". The Supreme Court ruled that Ms. Harris was entitled to be heard again by the
federal district court, which means that there would be a trial on her claim that Mr. Hardy,
owner of Forklift Systems, had created a “hostile working environment” for Ms. Harris. Apart
from the legal aspects, did he really do anything unethical? How can you tell?
a. Which of his actions, if any, were contrary to utilitarian thinking?
b. If Kant were his second-in-command and advising him on ethical matters, would he have
approved of Mr. Hardy’s behavior? Why or why not?
Consider the behaviors alleged by Ms. Harris and assume for a moment that they are all true. In
terms of core values, which of these behaviors are not consistent with the core values Josephson
points to? Be specific.
Assume that Forklift Systems is a large public corporation and that the CEO engages in these kinds
of behaviors. Assume also that the board of directors knows about it. What action should the board
take, and why?
Assume that the year is 1963, prior to the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Title
VII provisions regarding equal employment opportunity that prohibit discrimination based on
sex. So, Mr. Hardy’s actions are not illegal, fraudulent, or deceitful. Assume also that he heads
a large public company and that there is a large amount of turnover and unhappiness among
the women who work for the company. No one can sue him for being sexist or lecherous, but
are his actions consistent with maximizing shareholder returns? Should the board be
concerned?
Notice that this question is really a stand-in for any situation faced by a company today
regarding its CEO where the actions are not illegal but are ethically questionable. What would 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
74
conscious capitalism tell a CEO or a board to do where some group of its employees are
regularly harassed or disadvantaged by top management?
SELF -TEST QUESTIONS
1. Milton Friedman would have been most likely to agree to which of the following statements?
a. The purpose of the corporation is to find a path to sustainable corporate profits by paying
careful attention to key stakeholders.
b. The business of business is business.
c. The CEO and the board should have a single-minded focus on delivering maximum value to
shareholders of the business.
d. All is fair in love, war, and business.
Milton Friedman meant (using the material quoted in this chapter) that companies should
a. Find a path to sustainable profits by looking at the interconnected needs and desires of all
the stakeholders.
b. Always remember that the business of business is business.
c. Remind the CEO that he or she has one duty: to maximize shareholder wealth by any means
possible.
d. Maximize shareholder wealth by engaging in open competition without fraud or deceit.
What are some key drawbacks to utilitarian thinking at the corporate level?
a. The corporation may do a cost-benefit analysis that puts the greatest good of the
firm above all other considerations.
b. It is difficult to predict future consequences; decision makers in for-profit organizations will
tend to overestimate the upside of certain decisions and underestimate the downside.
c. Short-term interests will be favored over long-term consequences.
d. all of the above
e. a and b only
Which ethical perspective would allow that under certain circumstances, it might be ethical
to lie to a liar?
a. deontology
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
75
b. virtue ethics
c. utilitarianism
d. all of the above
Under conscious capitalism,
a. Virtue ethics is ignored.
b. Shareholders, whether they be traders or long-term investors, are always the first and last
consideration for the CEO and the board.
c. Maximizing profits comes from a focus on higher purposes and harmonizing the interests of
various stakeholders.
d. Kantian duties take precedence over cost-benefit analyses.
SELF -TEST ANSWERS
1. c
2. d
3. d
4. c
5. c
Chapter 3
Courts and the Legal Process
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to do the following:
1. Describe the two different court systems in the United States, and explain why some cases can be filed in
either court system.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
76
2. Explain the importance of subject matter jurisdiction and personal jurisdiction and know the difference
between the two.
3. Describe the various stages of a civil action: from pleadings, to discovery, to trial, and to appeals.
4. Describe two alternatives to litigation: mediation and arbitration.
In the United States, law and government are interdependent. The Constitution establishes the basic
framework of government and imposes certain limitations on the powers of government. In turn, the
various branches of government are intimately involved in making, enforcing, and interpreting the law.
Today, much of the law comes from Congress and the state legislatures. But it is in the courts that
legislation is interpreted and prior case law is interpreted and applied.
As we go through this chapter, consider the case of Harry and Kay Robinson. In which court should the
Robinsons file their action? Can the Oklahoma court hear the case and make a judgment that will be
enforceable against all of the defendants? Which law will the court use to come to a decision? Will it use
New York law, Oklahoma law, federal law, or German law?
Robinson v. Audi
Harry and Kay Robinson purchased a new Audi automobile from Seaway Volkswagen, Inc. (Seaway), in
Massena, New York, in 1976. The following year the Robinson family, who resided in New York, left that
state for a new home in Arizona. As they passed through Oklahoma, another car struck their Audi in the
rear, causing a fire that severely burned Kay Robinson and her two children. Later on, the Robinsons
brought a products-liability action in the District Court for Creek County, Oklahoma, claiming that their
injuries resulted from the defective design and placement of the Audi’s gas tank and fuel system. They
sued numerous defendants, including the automobile’s manufacturer, Audi NSU Auto Union
Aktiengesellschaft (Audi); its importer, Volkswagen of America, Inc. (Volkswagen); its regional
distributor, World-Wide Volkswagen Corp. (World-Wide); and its retail dealer, Seaway.
Should the Robinsons bring their action in state court or in federal court? Over which of the defendants
will the court have personal jurisdiction?
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
77
3.1 The Relationship between State and Federal Court Systems
in the United States
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Understand the different but complementary roles of state and federal court systems.
2. Explain why it makes sense for some courts to hear and decide only certain kinds of cases.
3. Describe the difference between a trial court and an appellate court.
Although it is sometimes said that there are two separate court systems, the reality is more complex.
There are, in fact, fifty-two court systems: those of the fifty states, the local court system in the District of
Columbia, and the federal court system. At the same time, these are not entirely separate; they all have
several points of contact.
State and local courts must honor both federal law and the laws of the other states. First, state courts must
honor federal law where state laws are in conflict with federal laws (under the supremacy clause of the
Constitution; see Chapter 4 "Constitutional Law and US Commerce"). Second, claims arising under
federal statutes can often be tried in the state courts, where the Constitution or Congress has not explicitly
required that only federal courts can hear that kind of claim. Third, under the full faith and credit clause, 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
78
each state court is obligated to respect the final judgments of courts in other states. Thus a contract
dispute resolved by an Arkansas court cannot be reiterated in North Dakota when the plaintiff wants to
collect on the Arkansas judgment in North Dakota. Fourth, state courts often must consider the laws of
other states in deciding cases involving issues where two states have an interest, such as when drivers
from two different states collide in a third state. Under these circumstances, state judges will consult their
own state’s case decisions involving conflicts of laws and sometimes decide that they must apply another
state’s laws to decide the case (see Table 3.1 "Sample Conflict-of-Law Principles").
As state courts are concerned with federal law, so federal courts are often concerned with state law and
with what happens in state courts. Federal courts will consider state-law-based claims when a case
involves claims using both state and federal law. Claims based on federal laws will permit the federal court
to take jurisdiction over the whole case, including any state issues raised. In those cases, the federal court
is said to exercise “pendent jurisdiction” over the state claims. Also, the Supreme Court will occasionally
take appeals from a state supreme court where state law raises an important issue of federal law to be
decided. For example, a convict on death row may claim that the state’s chosen method of execution using
the injection of drugs is unusually painful and involves “cruel and unusual punishment,” raising an Eighth
Amendment issue.
There is also a broad category of cases heard in federal courts that concern only state legal issues—
namely, cases that arise between citizens of different states. The federal courts are permitted to hear these
cases under their so-called diversity of citizenship jurisdiction (or diversity jurisdiction). A citizen of New
Jersey may sue a citizen of New York over a contract dispute in federal court, but if both were citizens of
New Jersey, the plaintiff would be limited to the state courts. The Constitution established diversity
jurisdiction because it was feared that local courts would be hostile toward people from other states and
that they would need separate courts. In 2009, nearly a third of all lawsuits filed in federal court were
based on diversity of citizenship. In these cases, the federal courts were applying state law, rather than
taking federal question jurisdiction, where federal law provided the basis for the lawsuit or where the
United States was a party (as plaintiff or defendant).
Why are there so many diversity cases in federal courts? Defense lawyers believe that there is sometimes a
“home-court advantage” for an in-state plaintiff who brings a lawsuit against a nonresident in his local
state court. The defense attorney is entitled to ask for removal to a federal court where there is diversity. 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
79
This fits with the original reason for diversity jurisdiction in the Constitution—the concern that judges in
one state court would favor the in-state plaintiff rather than a nonresident defendant. Another reason
there are so many diversity cases is that plaintiffs’ attorneys know that removal is common and that it will
move the case along faster by filing in federal court to begin with. Some plaintiffs’ attorneys also find
advantages in pursuing a lawsuit in federal court. Federal court procedures are often more efficient than
state court procedures, so that federal dockets are often less crowded. This means a case will get to trial
faster, and many lawyers enjoy the higher status that comes in practicing before the federal bench. In
some federal districts, judgments for plaintiffs may be higher, on average, than in the local state court. In
short, not only law but also legal strategy factor into the popularity of diversity cases in federal courts.
State Court Systems
The vast majority of civil lawsuits in the United States are filed in state courts. Two aspects of civil
lawsuits are common to all state courts: trials and appeals. A court exercising a trial function
has original jurisdiction—that is, jurisdiction to determine the facts of the case and apply the law to them.
A court that hears appeals from the trial court is said to have appellate jurisdiction—it must accept the
facts as determined by the trial court and limit its review to the lower court’s theory of the applicable law.
Limited Jurisdiction Courts
In most large urban states and many smaller states, there are four and sometimes five levels of courts. The
lowest level is that of the limited jurisdiction courts. These are usually county or municipal courts with
original jurisdiction to hear minor criminal cases (petty assaults, traffic offenses, and breach of peace,
among others) and civil cases involving monetary amounts up to a fixed ceiling (no more than $10,000 in
most states and far less in many states). Most disputes that wind up in court are handled in the 18,000-
plus limited jurisdiction courts, which are estimated to hear more than 80 percent of all cases.
One familiar limited jurisdiction court is the small claims court, with jurisdiction to hear civil cases
involving claims for amounts ranging between $1,000 and $5,000 in about half the states and for
considerably less in the other states ($500 to $1,000). The advantage of the small claims court is that its
procedures are informal, it is often located in a neighborhood outside the business district, it is usually 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
80
open after business hours, and it is speedy. Lawyers are not necessary to present the case and in some
states are not allowed to appear in court.
General Jurisdiction Courts
All other civil and criminal cases are heard in the general trial courts, or courts of general jurisdiction.
These go by a variety of names: superior, circuit, district, or common pleas court (New York calls its
general trial court the Supreme Court). These are the courts in which people seek redress for incidents
such as automobile accidents and injuries, or breaches of contract. These state courts also prosecute those
accused of murder, rape, robbery, and other serious crimes. The fact finder in these general jurisdiction
courts is not a judge, as in the lower courts, but a jury of citizens.
Although courts of general jurisdiction can hear all types of cases, in most states more than half involve
family matters (divorce, child custody disputes, and the like). A third was commercial cases, and slightly
over 10 percent were devoted to car accident cases and other torts (as discussed in Chapter 7
"Introduction to Tort Law").
Most states have specialized courts that hear only a certain type of case, such as landlord-tenant disputes
or probate of wills. Decisions by judges in specialized courts are usually final, although any party
dissatisfied with the outcome may be able to get a new trial in a court of general jurisdiction. Because
there has been one trial already, this is known as a trial de novo. It is not an appeal, since the case
essentially starts over.
Appellate Courts
The losing party in a general jurisdiction court can almost always appeal to either one or two higher
courts. These intermediate appellate courts—usually called courts of appeal—have been established in
forty states. They do not retry the evidence, but rather determine whether the trial was conducted in a
procedurally correct manner and whether the appropriate law was applied. For example, the appellant
(the losing party who appeals) might complain that the judge wrongly instructed the jury on the meaning
of the law, or improperly allowed testimony of a particular witness, or misconstrued the law in question.
The appellee (who won in the lower court) will ask that the appellant be denied—usually this means that
the appellee wants the lower-court judgment affirmed. The appellate court has quite a few choices: it can 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
81
affirm, modify, reverse, or reverse and remand the lower court (return the case to the lower court for
retrial).
The last type of appeal within the state courts system is to the highest court, the state Supreme Court,
which is composed of a single panel of between five and nine judges and is usually located in the state
capital. (The intermediate appellate courts are usually composed of panels of three judges and are situated
in various locations around the state.) In a few states, the highest court goes by a different name: in New
York, it is known as the court of appeals. In certain cases, appellants to the highest court in a state have
the right to have their appeals heard, but more often the Supreme Court selects the cases it wishes to hear.
For most litigants, the ruling of the state Supreme Court is final. In a relatively small class of cases—those
in which federal constitutional claims are made—appeal to the US Supreme Court to issue
a writ of certiorari remains a possibility.
The Federal Court System
District Courts
The federal judicial system is uniform throughout the United States and consists of three levels. At the
first level are the federal district courts, which are the trial courts in the federal system. Every state has
one or more federal districts; the less populous states have one, and the more populous states (California,
Texas, and New York) have four. The federal court with the heaviest commercial docket is the US District
Court for the Southern District of New York (Manhattan). There are forty-four district judges and fifteen
magistrates in this district. The district judges throughout the United States commonly preside over all
federal trials, both criminal and civil.
Courts of Appeal
Cases from the district courts can then be appealed to the circuit courts of appeal, of which there are
thirteen (Figure 3.1 "The Federal Judicial Circuits"). Each circuit oversees the work of the district courts in
several states. For example, the US Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit hears appeals from district
courts in New York, Connecticut, and Vermont. The US Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit hears
appeals from district courts in California, Oregon, Nevada, Montana, Washington, Idaho, Arizona, Alaska,
Hawaii, and Guam. The US Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit hears appeals from the 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
82
district court in Washington, DC, as well as from numerous federal administrative agencies (see Chapter 5
"Administrative Law"). The US Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, also located in Washington, hears
appeals in patent and customs cases. Appeals are usually heard by three-judge panels, but sometimes
there will be a rehearing at the court of appeals level, in which case all judges sit to hear the case “en
banc.”
There are also several specialized courts in the federal judicial system. These include the US Tax Court,
the Court of Customs and Patent Appeals, and the Court of Claims.
United States Supreme Court
Overseeing all federal courts is the US Supreme Court, in Washington, DC. It consists of nine justices—the
chief justice and eight associate justices. (This number is not constitutionally required; Congress can
establish any number. It has been set at nine since after the Civil War.) The Supreme Court has selective
control over most of its docket. By law, the cases it hears represent only a tiny fraction of the cases that are
submitted. In 2008, the Supreme Court had numerous petitions (over 7,000, not including thousands of
petitions from prisoners) but heard arguments in only 87 cases. The Supreme Court does not sit in panels.
All the justices hear and consider each case together, unless a justice has a conflict of interest and must
withdraw from hearing the case.
Figure 3.1 The Federal Judicial Circuits
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
83
Federal judges—including Supreme Court justices—are nominated by the president and must be
confirmed by the Senate. Unlike state judges, who are usually elected and preside for a fixed term of years,
federal judges sit for life unless they voluntarily retire or are impeached.
KEY TAKEAWAY
Trial courts and appellate courts have different functions. State trial courts sometimes hear cases with
federal law issues, and federal courts sometimes hear cases with state law issues. Within both state
and federal court systems, it is useful to know the different kinds of courts and what cases they can
decide.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
84
EXERCISES
1. Why all of this complexity? Why don’t state courts hear only claims based on state law, and federal
courts only federal-law-based claims?
2. Why would a plaintiff in Iowa with a case against a New Jersey defendant prefer to have the case
heard in Iowa?
3. James, a New Jersey resident, is sued by Jonah, an Iowa resident. After a trial in which James appears
and vigorously defends himself, the Iowa state court awards Jonah $136,750 dollars in damages for his
tort claim. In trying to collect from James in New Jersey, Jonah must have the New Jersey court certify
the Iowa judgment. Why, ordinarily, must the New Jersey court do so?
3.2 The Problem of Jurisdiction
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Explain the concept of subject matter jurisdiction and distinguish it from personal jurisdiction.
2. Understand how and where the US Constitution provides a set of instructions as to what federal
courts are empowered by law to do.
3. Know which kinds of cases must be heard in federal courts only.
4. Explain diversity of citizenship jurisdiction and be able to decide whether a case is eligible for diversity
jurisdiction in the federal courts.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
85
Jurisdiction is an essential concept in understanding courts and the legal system. Jurisdiction is a
combination of two Latin words: juris (law) and diction (to speak). Which court has the power “to speak
the law” is the basic question of jurisdiction.
There are two questions about jurisdiction in each case that must be answered before a judge will hear a
case: the question of subject matter jurisdiction and the question of personal jurisdiction. We will
consider the question of subject matter jurisdiction first, because judges do; if they determine, on the
basis of the initial documents in the case (the “pleadings”), that they have no power to hear and decide
that kind of case, they will dismiss it.
The Federal-State Balance: Federalism
State courts have their origins in colonial era courts. After the American Revolution, state courts
functioned (with some differences) much like they did in colonial times. The big difference after 1789 was
that state courts coexisted with federal courts. Federalism was the system devised by the nation’s founders
in which power is shared between states and the federal government. This sharing requires a division of
labor between the states and the federal government. It is Article III of the US Constitution that spells out
the respective spheres of authority (jurisdiction) between state and federal courts.
Take a close look at Article III of the Constitution. (You can find a printable copy of the Constitution
at http://www.findlaw.com.) Article III makes clear that federal courts are courts of limited power or
jurisdiction. Notice that the only kinds of cases federal courts are authorized to deal with have strong
federal connections. For example, federal courts have jurisdiction when a federal law is being used by the
plaintiff or prosecutor (a “federal question” case) or the case arises “in admiralty” (meaning that the
problem arose not on land but on sea, beyond the territorial jurisdiction of any state, or in navigable
waters within the United States). Implied in this list is the clear notion that states would continue to have
their own laws, interpreted by their own courts, and that federal courts were needed only where the issues
raised by the parties had a clear federal connection. The exception to this is diversity jurisdiction,
discussed later.
The Constitution was constructed with the idea that state courts would continue to deal with basic kinds
of claims such as tort, contract, or property claims. Since states sanction marriages and divorce, state
courts would deal with “domestic” (family) issues. Since states deal with birth and death records, it stands 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
86
to reason that paternity suits, probate disputes, and the like usually wind up in state courts. You wouldn’t
go to the federal building or courthouse to get a marriage license, ask for a divorce, or probate a will: these
matters have traditionally been dealt with by the states (and the thirteen original colonies before them).
Matters that historically get raised and settled in state court under state law include not only domestic and
probate matters but also law relating to corporations, partnerships, agency, contracts, property, torts, and
commercial dealings generally. You cannot get married or divorced in federal court, because federal
courts have no jurisdiction over matters that are historically (and are still) exclusively within the domain
of state law.
In terms of subject matter jurisdiction, then, state courts will typically deal with the kinds of disputes just
cited. Thus if you are Michigan resident and have an auto accident in Toledo with an Ohio resident and
you each blame each other for the accident, the state courts would ordinarily resolve the matter if the
dispute cannot otherwise be settled. Why state courts? Because when you blame one another and allege
that it’s the other person’s fault, you have the beginnings of a tort case, with negligence as a primary
element of the claim, and state courts have routinely dealt with this kind of claim, from British colonial
times through Independence and to the present. (See also Law “of this text.) People have had a need to
resolve this kind of dispute long before our federal courts were created, and you can tell from Article III
that the founders did not specify that tort or negligence claims should be handled by the federal courts.
Again, federal courts are courts of limited jurisdiction, limited to the kinds of cases specified in Article III.
If the case before the federal court does not fall within one of those categories, the federal court cannot
constitutionally hear the case because it does not have subject matter jurisdiction.
Always remember: a court must have subject matter jurisdiction to hear and decide a case. Without it, a
court cannot address the merits of the controversy or even take the next jurisdictional step of figuring out
which of the defendants can be sued in that court. The question of which defendants are appropriately
before the court is a question of personal jurisdiction.
Because there are two court systems, it is important for a plaintiff to file in the right court to begin with.
The right court is the one that has subject matter jurisdiction over the case—that is, the power to hear and
decide the kind of case that is filed. Not only is it a waste of time to file in the wrong court system and be
dismissed, but if the dismissal comes after the filing period imposed by the
applicable statute of limitations, it will be too late to re-file in the correct court system. Such cases will be 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
87
routinely dismissed, regardless of how deserving the plaintiff might be in his quest for justice. (The
plaintiff’s only remedy at that point would be to sue his lawyer for negligence for failing to mind the clock
and get to the right court in time!)
Exclusive Jurisdiction in Federal Courts
With two court systems, a plaintiff (or the plaintiff’s attorney, most likely) must decide whether to file a
case in the state court system or the federal court system. Federal courts have exclusive jurisdiction over
certain kinds of cases. The reason for this comes directly from the Constitution. Article III of the US
Constitution provides the following:
The judicial Power shall extend to all Cases, in Law and Equity, arising under this
Constitution, the Laws of the United States, and Treaties made, or which shall be made, under
their Authority; to all Cases affecting Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls; to all
Cases of admiralty and maritime Jurisdiction; to Controversies to which the United States
shall be a Party; to Controversies between two or more States; between a State and Citizens of
another State; between Citizens of different States; between Citizens of the same State
claiming Lands under Grants of different States, and between a State, or the Citizens thereof,
and foreign States, Citizens or Subjects.
By excluding diversity cases, we can assemble a list of the kinds of cases that can only be heard in federal
courts. The list looks like this:
1. Suits between states. Cases in which two or more states are a party.
2. Cases involving ambassadors and other high-ranking public figures. Cases arising between foreign
ambassadors and other high-ranking public officials.
3. Federal crimes. Crimes defined by or mentioned in the US Constitution or those defined or punished
by federal statute. Such crimes include treason against the United States, piracy, counterfeiting,
crimes against the law of nations, and crimes relating to the federal government’s authority to
regulate interstate commerce. However, most crimes are state matters.
4. Bankruptcy. The statutory procedure, usually triggered by insolvency, by which a person is relieved of
most debts and undergoes a judicially supervised reorganization or liquidation for the benefit of the
person’s creditors.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
88
5. Patent, copyright, and trademark cases
a. Patent. The exclusive right to make, use, or sell an invention for a specified period (usually seventeen
years), granted by the federal government to the inventor if the device or process is novel, useful, and
nonobvious.
b. Copyright. The body of law relating to a property right in an original work of authorship (such as a
literary, musical, artistic, photographic, or film work) fixed in any tangible medium of expression,
giving the holder the exclusive right to reproduce, adapt, distribute, perform, and display the work.
c. Trademark. A word, phrase, logo, or other graphic symbol used by a manufacturer or seller to
distinguish its product or products from those of others.
Admiralty. The system of laws that has grown out of the practice of admiralty courts: courts that
exercise jurisdiction over all maritime contracts, torts, injuries, and offenses.
Antitrust. Federal laws designed to protect trade and commerce from restraining monopolies,
price fixing, and price discrimination.
Securities and banking regulation. The body of law protecting the public by regulating the
registration, offering, and trading of securities and the regulation of banking practices.
Other cases specified by federal statute. Any other cases specified by a federal statute where
Congress declares that federal courts will have exclusive jurisdiction.
Concurrent Jurisdiction
When a plaintiff takes a case to state court, it will be because state courts typically hear that kind of case
(i.e., there is subject matter jurisdiction). If the plaintiff’s main cause of action comes from a certain
state’s constitution, statutes, or court decisions, the state courts have subject matter jurisdiction over the
case. If the plaintiff’s main cause of action is based on federal law (e.g., Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964), the federal courts have subject matter jurisdiction over the case. But federal courts will also have
subject matter jurisdiction over certain cases that have only a state-based cause of action; those cases are
ones in which the plaintiff(s) and the defendant(s) are from different states and the amount in
controversy is more than $75,000. State courts can have subject matter jurisdiction over certain cases that
have only a federal-based cause of action. The Supreme Court has now made clear that state courts
have concurrent jurisdiction of any federal cause of action unless Congress has given exclusive jurisdiction
to federal courts.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
89
In short, a case with a federal question can be often be heard in either state or federal court, and a case
that has parties with a diversity of citizenship can be heard in state courts or in federal courts where the
tests of complete diversity and amount in controversy are met. (See Note 3.18 "Summary of Rules on
Subject Matter Jurisdiction".)
Whether a case will be heard in a state court or moved to a federal court will depend on the parties. If a
plaintiff files a case in state trial court where concurrent jurisdiction applies, a defendant may (or may
not) ask that the case be removed to federal district court.
Summary of Rules on Subject Matter Jurisdiction
1. A court must always have subject matter jurisdiction and personal jurisdiction over at least one
defendant, to hear and decide a case.
2. A state court will have subject matter jurisdiction over any case that is not required to be brought in a
federal court.
Some cases can only be brought in federal court, such as bankruptcy cases, cases involving federal crimes,
patent cases, and Internal Revenue Service tax court claims. The list of cases for exclusive federal
jurisdiction is fairly short. That means that almost any state court will have subject matter jurisdiction
over almost any kind of case. If it’s a case based on state law, a state court will always have subject matter
jurisdiction.
3. A federal court will have subject matter jurisdiction over any case that is either based on a federal law
(statute, case, or US Constitution)
OR
A federal court will have subject matter jurisdiction over any case based on state law where the parties are
(1) from different states and (2) the amount in controversy is at least $75,000.
(1) The different states requirement means that no plaintiff can have permanent residence in a state
where any defendant has permanent residence—there must be complete diversity of citizenship as
between all plaintiffs and defendants.
(2) The amount in controversy requirement means that a good-faith estimate of the amount the plaintiff
may recover is at least $75,000.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
90
NOTE: For purposes of permanent residence, a corporation is considered a resident where it is
incorporated AND where it has a principal place of business.
4. In diversity cases, the following rules apply.
(1) Federal civil procedure rules apply to how the case is conducted before and during trial and any
appeals, but
(2) State law will be used as the basis for a determination of legal rights and responsibilities.
(a) This “choice of law” process is interesting but complicated. Basically, each state has its own set of
judicial decisions that resolve conflict of laws. For example, just because A sues B in a Texas court, the
Texas court will not necessarily apply Texas law. Anna and Bobby collide and suffer serious physical
injuries while driving their cars in Roswell, New Mexico. Both live in Austin and Bobby files a lawsuit in
Austin. The court there could hear it (having subject matter jurisdiction and personal jurisdiction over
Bobby) but would apply New Mexico law, which governs motor vehicle laws and accidents in New Mexico.
Why would the Texas judge do that?
(b) The Texas judge knows that which state’s law is chosen to apply to the case can make a decisive
difference in the case, as different states have different substantive law standards. For example, in a
breach of contract case, one state’s version of the Uniform Commercial Code may be different from
another’s, and which one the court decides to apply is often exceedingly good for one side and dismal for
the other. In Anna v. Bobby, if Texas has one kind of comparative negligence statute and New Mexico has
a different kind of comparative negligence statute, who wins or loses, or how much is awarded, could well
depend on which law applies. Because both were under the jurisdiction of New Mexico’s laws at the time,
it makes sense to apply New Mexico law.
(3) Why do some nonresident defendants prefer to be in federal court?
(a) In the state court, the judge is elected, and the jury may be familiar with or sympathetic to the “local”
plaintiff.
(b) The federal court provides a more neutral forum, with an appointed, life-tenured judge and a wider
pool of potential jurors (drawn from a wider geographical area).
(4) If a defendant does not want to be in state court and there is diversity, what is to be done?
(a) Make a motion for removal to the federal court.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
91
(b) The federal court will not want to add to its caseload, or docket, but must take the case unless there
is not complete diversity of citizenship or the amount in controversy is less than $75,000.
To better understand subject matter jurisdiction in action, let’s take an example. Wile E. Coyote wants a
federal judge to hear his products-liability action against Acme, Inc., even though the action is based on
state law. Mr. Coyote’s attorney wants to “make a federal case” out of it, thinking that the jurors in the
federal district court’s jury pool will understand the case better and be more likely to deliver a “high value”
verdict for Mr. Coyote. Mr. Coyote resides in Arizona, and Acme is incorporated in the state of Delaware
and has its principal place of business in Chicago, Illinois. The federal court in Arizona can hear and
decide Mr. Coyote’s case (i.e., it has subject matter jurisdiction over the case) because of diversity of
citizenship. If Mr. Coyote was injured by one of Acme’s defective products while chasing a roadrunner in
Arizona, the federal district court judge would hear his action—using federal procedural law—and decide
the case based on the substantive law of Arizona on product liability.
But now change the facts only slightly: Acme is incorporated in Delaware but has its principal place of
business in Phoenix, Arizona. Unless Mr. Coyote has a federal law he is using as a basis for his claims
against Acme, his attempt to get a federal court to hear and decide the case will fail. It will fail because
there is not complete diversity of citizenship between the plaintiff and the defendant.
Robinson v. Audi
Now consider Mr. and Mrs. Robinson and their products-liability claim against Seaway Volkswagen and
the other three defendants. There is no federal products-liability law that could be used as a cause of
action. They are most likely suing the defendants using products-liability law based on common-law
negligence or common-law strict liability law, as found in state court cases. They were not yet Arizona
residents at the time of the accident, and their accident does not establish them as Oklahoma residents,
either. They bought the vehicle in New York from a New York–based retailer. None of the other
defendants is from Oklahoma.
They file in an Oklahoma state court, but how will they (their attorney or the court) know if the state court
has subject matter jurisdiction? Unless the case is required to be in a federal court (i.e., unless the federal
courts have exclusive jurisdiction over this kind of case), any state court system will have subject matter 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
92
jurisdiction, including Oklahoma’s state court system. But if their claim is for a significant amount of
money, they cannot file in small claims court, probate court, or any court in Oklahoma that does not have
statutory jurisdiction over their claim. They will need to file in a court of general jurisdiction. In short,
even filing in the right court system (state versus federal), the plaintiff must be careful to find the court
that has subject matter jurisdiction.
If they wish to go to federal court, can they? There is no federal question presented here (the claim is
based on state common law), and the United States is not a party, so the only basis for federal court
jurisdiction would be diversity jurisdiction. If enough time has elapsed since the accident and they have
established themselves as Arizona residents, they could sue in federal court in Oklahoma (or elsewhere),
but only if none of the defendants—the retailer, the regional Volkswagen company, Volkswagen of North
America, or Audi (in Germany) are incorporated in or have a principal place of business in Arizona. The
federal judge would decide the case using federal civil procedure but would have to make the appropriate
choice of state law. In this case, the choice of conflicting laws would most likely be Oklahoma, where the
accident happened, or New York, where the defective product was sold.
Table 3.1 Sample Conflict-of-Law Principles
Substantive Law Issue Law to be Applied
Liability for injury caused by tortious conduct State in which the injury was inflicted
Real property State where the property is located
Personal Property: inheritance Domicile of deceased (not location of property)
Contract: validity State in which contract was made
Contract: breach State in which contract was to be performed*
*Or, in many states, the state with the most significant contacts with the contractual activities
Note: Choice-of-law clauses in a contract will ordinarily be honored by judges in state and federal
courts.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
93
Legal Procedure, Including Due Process and Personal Jurisdiction
In this section, we consider how lawsuits are begun and how the court knows that it has both subject
matter jurisdiction and personal jurisdiction over at least one of the named defendants.
The courts are not the only institutions that can resolve disputes. In Section 3.8 "Alternative Means of
Resolving Disputes", we will discuss other dispute-resolution forums, such as arbitration and mediation.
For now, let us consider how courts make decisions in civil disputes. Judicial decision making in the
context of litigation (civil lawsuits) is a distinctive form of dispute resolution.
First, to get the attention of a court, the plaintiff must make a claim based on existing laws. Second, courts
do not reach out for cases. Cases are brought to them, usually when an attorney files a case with the right
court in the right way, following the various laws that govern all civil procedures in a state or in the federal
system. (Most US states’ procedural laws are similar to the federal procedural code.)
Once at the court, the case will proceed through various motions (motions to dismiss for lack of
jurisdiction, for example, or insufficient service of process), the proofs (submission of evidence), and the
arguments (debate about the meaning of the evidence and the law) of contesting parties.
This is at the heart of the adversary system, in which those who oppose each other may attack the other’s
case through proofs and cross-examination. Every person in the United States who wishes to take a case
to court is entitled to hire a lawyer. The lawyer works for his client, not the court, and serves him as an
advocate, or supporter. The client’s goal is to persuade the court of the accuracy and justness of his
position. The lawyer’s duty is to shape the evidence and the argument—the line of reasoning about the
evidence—to advance his client’s cause and persuade the court of its rightness. The lawyer for the
opposing party will be doing the same thing, of course, for her client. The judge (or, if one is sitting, the
jury) must sort out the facts and reach a decision from this cross-fire of evidence and argument.
The method of adjudication—the act of making an order or judgment—has several important features.
First, it focuses the conflicting issues. Other, secondary concerns are minimized or excluded altogether.
Relevance is a key concept in any trial. The judge is required to decide the questions presented at the trial,
not to talk about related matters. Second, adjudication requires that the judge’s decision be reasoned, and
that is why judges write opinions explaining their decisions (an opinion may be omitted when the verdict
comes from a jury). Third, the judge’s decision must not only be reasoned but also be responsive to the
case presented: the judge is not free to say that the case is unimportant and that he therefore will ignore it. 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
94
Unlike other branches of government that are free to ignore problems pressing upon them, judges must
decide cases. (For example, a legislature need not enact a law, no matter how many people petition it to do
so.) Fourth, the court must respond in a certain way. The judge must pay attention to the parties’
arguments and his decision must result from their proofs and arguments. Evidence that is not presented
and legal arguments that are not made cannot be the basis for what the judge decides. Also, judges are
bound by standards of weighing evidence: the burden of proof in a civil case is generally a “preponderance
of the evidence.”
In all cases, the plaintiff—the party making a claim and initiating the lawsuit (in a criminal case the
plaintiff is the prosecution)—has the burden of proving his case. If he fails to prove it, the defendant—the
party being sued or prosecuted—will win.
Criminal prosecutions carry the most rigorous burden of proof: the government must prove its case
against the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt. That is, even if it seems very likely that the defendant
committed the crime, as long as there remains some reasonable doubt—perhaps he was not clearly
identified as the culprit, perhaps he has an alibi that could be legitimate—the jury must vote to acquit
rather than convict.
By contrast, the burden of proof in ordinary civil cases—those dealing with contracts, personal injuries,
and most of the cases in this book—is a preponderance of the evidence, which means that the plaintiff’s
evidence must outweigh whatever evidence the defendant can muster that casts doubts on the plaintiff’s
claim. This is not merely a matter of counting the number of witnesses or of the length of time that they
talk: the judge in a trial without a jury (a bench trial), or the jury where one is impaneled, must apply the
preponderance of evidence test by determining which side has the greater weight of credible, relevant
evidence.
Adjudication and the adversary system imply certain other characteristics of courts. Judges must be
impartial; those with a personal interest in a matter must refuse to hear it. The ruling of a court, after all
appeals are exhausted, is final. This principle is known as res judicata (Latin for “the thing is decided”),
and it means that the same parties may not take up the same dispute in another court at another time.
Finally, a court must proceed according to a public set of formal procedural rules; a judge cannot make up
the rules as he goes along. To these rules we now turn.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
95
How a Case Proceeds
Complaint and Summons
Beginning a lawsuit is simple and is spelled out in the rules of procedure by which each court system
operates. In the federal system, the plaintiff begins a lawsuit by filing a complaint—a document clearly
explaining the grounds for suit—with the clerk of the court. The court’s agent (usually a sheriff, for state
trial courts, or a US deputy marshal, in federal district courts) will then serve the defendant with the
complaint and a summons. The summons is a court document stating the name of the plaintiff and his
attorney and directing the defendant to respond to the complaint within a fixed time period.
The timing of the filing can be important. Almost every possible legal complaint is governed by a federal
or state statute of limitations, which requires a lawsuit to be filed within a certain period of time. For
example, in many states a lawsuit for injuries resulting from an automobile accident must be filed within
two years of the accident or the plaintiff forfeits his right to proceed. As noted earlier, making a correct
initial filing in a court that has subject matter jurisdiction is critical to avoiding statute of limitations
problems.
Jurisdiction and Venue
The place of filing is equally important, and there are two issues regarding location. The first is subject
matter jurisdiction, as already noted. A claim for breach of contract, in which the amount at stake is $1
million, cannot be brought in a local county court with jurisdiction to hear cases involving sums of up to
only $1,000. Likewise, a claim for copyright violation cannot be brought in a state superior court, since
federal courts have exclusive jurisdiction over copyright cases.
The second consideration is venue—the proper geographic location of the court. For example, every
county in a state might have a superior court, but the plaintiff is not free to pick any county. Again, a
statute will spell out to which court the plaintiff must go (e.g., the county in which the plaintiff resides or
the county in which the defendant resides or maintains an office).
Service of Process and Personal Jurisdiction
The defendant must be “served”—that is, must receive notice that he has been sued. Service can be done
by physically presenting the defendant with a copy of the summons and complaint. But sometimes the 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
96
defendant is difficult to find (or deliberately avoids the marshal or other process server). The rules spell
out a variety of ways by which individuals and corporations can be served. These include using US Postal
Service certified mail or serving someone already designated to receive service of process. A corporation
or partnership, for example, is often required by state law to designate a “registered agent” for purposes of
getting public notices or receiving a summons and complaint.
One of the most troublesome problems is service on an out-of-state defendant. The personal jurisdiction
of a state court over persons is clear for those defendants found within the state. If the plaintiff claims that
an out-of-state defendant injured him in some way, must the plaintiff go to the defendant’s home state to
serve him? Unless the defendant had some significant contact with the plaintiff’s state, the plaintiff may
indeed have to. For instance, suppose a traveler from Maine stopped at a roadside diner in Montana and
ordered a slice of homemade pie that was tainted and caused him to be sick. The traveler may not simply
return home and mail the diner a notice that he is suing it in a Maine court. But if out-of-state defendants
have some contact with the plaintiff’s state of residence, there might be grounds to bring them within the
jurisdiction of the plaintiff’s state courts. In Burger King v. Rudzewicz, Section 3.9 "Cases", the federal
court in Florida had to consider whether it was constitutionally permissible to exercise personal
jurisdiction over a Michigan franchisee.
Again, recall that even if a court has subject matter jurisdiction, it must also have personal jurisdiction
over each defendant against whom an enforceable judgment can be made. Often this is not a problem; you
might be suing a person who lives in your state or regularly does business in your state. Or a nonresident
may answer your complaint without objecting to the court’s “in personam” (personal) jurisdiction. But
many defendants who do not reside in the state where the lawsuit is filed would rather not be put to the
inconvenience of contesting a lawsuit in a distant forum. Fairness—and the due process clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment—dictates that nonresidents should not be required to defend lawsuits far from
their home base, especially where there is little or no contact or connection between the nonresident and
the state where a lawsuit is brought.
Summary of Rules on Personal Jurisdiction
1. Once a court determines that it has subject matter jurisdiction, it must find at least one defendant
over which it is “fair” (i.e., in accord with due process) to exercise personal jurisdiction.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
97
2. If a plaintiff sues five defendants and the court has personal jurisdiction over just one, the case can be
heard, but the court cannot make a judgment against the other four.
1. But if the plaintiff loses against defendant 1, he can go elsewhere (to another state or states) and sue
defendants 2, 3, 4, or 5.
2. The court’s decision in the first lawsuit (against defendant 1) does not determine the liability of the
nonparticipating defendants.
This involves the principle of res judicata, which means that you can’t bring the same action against the
same person (or entity) twice. It’s like the civil side of double jeopardy. Res means “thing,”
and judicata means “adjudicated.” Thus the “thing” has been “adjudicated” and should not be judged
again. But, as to nonparticipating parties, it is not over. If you have a different case against the same
defendant—one that arises out of a completely different situation—that case is not barred by res judicata.
3. Service of process is a necessary (but not sufficient) condition for getting personal jurisdiction over a
particular defendant (see rule 4).
1. In order to get a judgment in a civil action, the plaintiff must serve a copy of the complaint and a
summons on the defendant.
2. There are many ways to do this.
 The process server personally serves a complaint on the defendant.
 The process server leaves a copy of the summons and complaint at the residence of the defendant, in
the hands of a competent person.
 The process server sends the summons and complaint by certified mail, return receipt requested.
 The process server, if all other means are not possible, notifies the defendant by publication in a
newspaper having a minimum number of readers (as may be specified by law).
4. In addition to successfully serving the defendant with process, a plaintiff must convince the court that
exercising personal jurisdiction over the defendant is consistent with due process and any statutes in
that state that prescribe the jurisdictional reach of that state (the so-called long-arm statutes). The
Supreme Court has long recognized various bases for judging whether such process is fair.
1. Consent. The defendant agrees to the court’s jurisdiction by coming to court, answering the
complaint, and having the matter litigated there.
2. Domicile. The defendant is a permanent resident of that state.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
98
3. Event. The defendant did something in that state, related to the lawsuit, that makes it fair for the state
to say, “Come back and defend!”
4. Service of process within the state will effectively provide personal jurisdiction over the nonresident.
Again, let’s consider Mrs. Robinson and her children in the Audi accident. She could file a lawsuit
anywhere in the country. She could file a lawsuit in Arizona after she establishes residency there. But
while the Arizona court would have subject matter jurisdiction over any products-liability claim (or any
claim that was not required to be heard in a federal court), the Arizona court would face an issue of “in
personam jurisdiction,” or personal jurisdiction: under the due process clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment, each state must extend due process to citizens of all of the other states. Because fairness is
essential to due process, the court must consider whether it is fair to require an out-of-state defendant to
appear and defend against a lawsuit that could result in a judgment against that defendant.
Almost every state in the United States has a statute regarding personal jurisdiction, instructing judges
when it is permissible to assert personal jurisdiction over an out-of-state resident. These are called longarm statutes. But no state can reach out beyond the limits of what is constitutionally permissible under
the Fourteenth Amendment, which binds the states with its proviso to guarantee the due process rights of
the citizens of every state in the union. The “minimum contacts” test in Burger King v.
Rudzewicz (Section 3.9 "Cases") tries to make the fairness mandate of the due process clause more
specific. So do other tests articulated in the case (such as “does not offend traditional notions of fair play
and substantial justice”). These tests are posed by the Supreme Court and heeded by all lower courts in
order to honor the provisions of the Fourteenth Amendment’s due process guarantees. These tests are in
addition to any state long-arm statute’s instructions to courts regarding the assertion of personal
jurisdiction over nonresidents.
Choice of Law and Choice of Forum Clauses
In a series of cases, the Supreme Court has made clear that it will honor contractual choices of parties in a
lawsuit. Suppose the parties to a contract wind up in court arguing over the application of the contract’s
terms. If the parties are from two different states, the judge may have difficulty determining which law to
apply (see Table 3.1 "Sample Conflict-of-Law Principles"). But if the contract says that a particular state’s
law will be applied if there is a dispute, then ordinarily the judge will apply that state’s law as a rule of 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
99
decision in the case. For example, Kumar Patel (a Missouri resident) opens a brokerage account with
Goldman, Sachs and Co., and the contractual agreement calls for “any disputes arising under this
agreement” to be determined “according to the laws of the state of New York.” When Kumar claims in a
Missouri court that his broker is “churning” his account, and, on the other hand, Goldman, Sachs claims
that Kumar has failed to meet his margin call and owes $38,568.25 (plus interest and attorney’s fees), the
judge in Missouri will apply New York law based on the contract between Kumar and Goldman, Sachs.
Ordinarily, a choice-of-law clause will be accompanied by a choice-of-forum clause. In a choice-of-forum
clause, the parties in the contract specify which court they will go to in the event of a dispute arising under
the terms of contract. For example, Harold (a resident of Virginia) rents a car from Alamo at the Denver
International Airport. He does not look at the fine print on the contract. He also waives all collision and
other insurance that Alamo offers at the time of his rental. While driving back from Telluride Bluegrass
Festival, he has an accident in Idaho Springs, Colorado. His rented Nissan Altima is badly damaged. On
returning to Virginia, he would like to settle up with Alamo, but his insurance company and Alamo cannot
come to terms. He realizes, however, that he has agreed to hear the dispute with Alamo in a specific court
in San Antonio, Texas. In the absence of fraud or bad faith, any court in the United States is likely to
uphold the choice-of-form clause and require Harold (or his insurance company) to litigate in San
Antonio, Texas.
KEY TAKEAWAY
There are two court systems in the United States. It is important to know which system—the state
court system or the federal court system—has the power to hear and decide a particular case. Once
that is established, the Constitution compels an inquiry to make sure that no court extends its reach
unfairly to out-of-state residents. The question of personal jurisdiction is a question of fairness and due
process to nonresidents.
EXERCISES
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
100
1. The Constitution specifies that federal courts have exclusive jurisdiction over admiralty claims. Mr.
and Mrs. Shute have a claim against Carnival Cruise lines for the negligence of the cruise line. Mrs.
Shute sustained injuries as a result of the company’s negligence. Mr. and Mrs. Shute live in the state
of Washington. Can they bring their claim in state court? Must they bring their claim in federal court?
2. Congress passed Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. In Title VII, employers are required not to
discriminate against employees on the basis of race, color, sex, religion, or national origin. In passing
Title VII, Congress did not require plaintiffs to file only in federal courts. That is, Congress made no
statement in Title VII that federal courts had “exclusive jurisdiction” over Title VII claims. Mrs. Harris
wishes to sue Forklift Systems, Inc. of Nashville, Tennessee, for sexual harassment under Title VII. She
has gone through the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission process and has a right-to-sue
letter, which is required before a Title VII action can be brought to court. Can she file a complaint that
will be heard by a state court?
3. Mrs. Harris fails to go to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission to get her right-to-sue letter
against Forklift Systems, Inc. She therefore does not have a viable Title VII cause of action against
Forklift. She does, however, have her rights under Tennessee’s equal employment statute and various
court decisions from Tennessee courts regarding sexual harassment. Forklift is incorporated in
Tennessee and has its principal place of business in Nashville. Mrs. Harris is also a citizen of
Tennessee. Explain why, if she brings her employment discrimination and sexual harassment lawsuit in
a federal court, her lawsuit will be dismissed for lack of subject matter jurisdiction.
4. Suppose Mr. and Mrs. Robinson find in the original paperwork with Seaway Volkswagen that there is a
contractual agreement with a provision that says “all disputes arising between buyer and Seaway
Volkswagen will be litigated, if at all, in the county courts of Westchester County, New York.” Will the
Oklahoma court take personal jurisdiction over Seaway Volkswagen, or will it require the Robinsons to
litigate their claim in New York?
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
101
3.3 Motions and Discovery
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Explain how a lawsuit can be dismissed prior to any trial.
2. Understand the basic principles and practices of discovery before a trial.
The early phases of a civil action are characterized by many different kinds of motions and a complex
process of mutual fact-finding between the parties that is known as discovery. A lawsuit will start with
the pleadings (complaint and answer in every case, and in some cases a counterclaim by the defendant 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
102
against the plaintiff and the plaintiff’s reply to the defendant’s counterclaim). After the pleadings, the
parties may make various motions, which are requests to the judge. Motions in the early stages of a
lawsuit usually aim to dismiss the lawsuit, to have it moved to another venue, or to compel the other party
to act in certain ways during the discovery process.
Initial Pleadings and Motions to Dismiss
The first papers filed in a lawsuit are called the pleadings. These include the plaintiff’s complaint and then
(usually after thirty or more days) the answer or response from the defendant. The answer may be
coupled with a counterclaim against the plaintiff. (In effect, the defendant becomes the plaintiff for the
claims she has against the original plaintiff.) The plaintiff may reply to any counterclaim by the defendant.
State and federal rules of civil procedure require that the complaint must state the nature of the plaintiff’s
claim, the jurisdiction of the court, and the nature of the relief that is being asked for (usually an award of
money, but sometimes an injunction, or a declaration of legal rights). In an answer, the defendant will
often deny all the allegations of the complaint or will admit to certain of its allegations and deny others.
A complaint and subsequent pleadings are usually quite general and give little detail. Cases can be decided
on the pleadings alone in the following situations: (1) If the defendant fails to answer the complaint, the
court can enter a default judgment, awarding the plaintiff what he seeks. (2) The defendant can move to
dismiss the complaint on the grounds that the plaintiff failed to “state a claim on which relief can be
granted,” or on the basis that there is no subject matter jurisdiction for the court chosen by the plaintiff,
or on the basis that there is no personal jurisdiction over the defendant. The defendant is saying, in effect,
that even if all the plaintiff’s allegations are true, they do not amount to a legal claim that can be heard by
the court. For example, a claim that the defendant induced a woman to stop dating the plaintiff (a socalled alienation of affections cause of action) is no longer actionable in US state courts, and any court will
dismiss the complaint without any further proceedings. (This type of dismissal is occasionally still called a
demurrer.)
A third kind of dismissal can take place on a motion for summary judgment. If there is no triable question
of fact or law, there is no reason to have a trial. For example, the plaintiff sues on a promissory note and,
at deposition (an oral examination under oath); the defendant admits having made no payment on the 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
103
note and offers no excuse that would be recognizable as a reason not to pay. There is no reason to have a
trial, and the court should grant summary judgment.
Discovery
If there is a factual dispute, the case will usually involve some degree of discovery, where each party tries
to get as much information out of the other party as the rules allow. Until the 1940s, when discovery
became part of civil procedure rules, a lawsuit was frequently a game in which each party hid as much
information as possible and tried to surprise the other party in court.
Beginning with a change in the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure adopted by the Supreme Court in 1938
and subsequently followed by many of the states, the parties are entitled to learn the facts of the case
before trial. The basic idea is to help the parties determine what the evidence might be, who the potential
witnesses are, and what specific issues are relevant. Discovery can proceed by several methods. A party
may serve an interrogatory on his adversary—a written request for answers to specific questions. Or a
party may depose the other party or a witness. A deposition is a live question-and-answer session at which
the witness answers questions put to him by one of the parties’ lawyers. His answers are recorded
verbatim and may be used at trial. Each party is also entitled to inspect books, documents, records, and
other physical items in the possession of the other. This is a broad right, as it is not limited to just
evidence that is admissible at trial. Discovery of physical evidence means that a plaintiff may inspect a
company’s accounts, customer lists, assets, profit-and-loss statements, balance sheets, engineering and
quality-control reports, sales reports, and virtually any other document.
The lawyers, not the court, run the discovery process. For example, one party simply makes a written
demand, stating the time at which the deposition will take place or the type of documents it wishes to
inspect and make copies of. A party unreasonably resisting discovery methods (whether depositions,
written interrogatories, or requests for documents) can be challenged, however, and judges are often
brought into the process to push reluctant parties to make more disclosure or to protect a party from
irrelevant or unreasonable discovery requests. For example, the party receiving the discovery request can
apply to the court for a protective order if it can show that the demand is for privileged material (e.g., a
party’s lawyers’ records are not open for inspection) or that the demand was made to harass the opponent. 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
104
In complex cases between companies, the discovery of documents can run into tens of millions of pages
and can take years. Depositions can consume days or even weeks of an executive’s time.
KEY TAKEAWAY
Many cases never get to trial. They are disposed of by motions to dismiss or are settled after extensive
discovery makes clear to the parties the strengths and weaknesses of the parties to the dispute.
EXERCISES
1. Mrs. Robinson (in the Volkswagen Audi case) never establishes residency in Arizona, returns to New
York, and files her case in federal district court in New York, alleging diversity jurisdiction. Assume that
the defendants do not want to have the case heard in federal court. What motion will they make?
2. Under contributory negligence, the negligence of any plaintiff that causes or contributes to the
injuries a plaintiff complains of will be grounds for dismissal. Suppose that in discovery, Mr. Ferlito
in Ferlito v. Johnson & Johnson (Section 3.9 "Cases") admits that he brought the cigarette lighter
dangerously close to his costume, saying, “Yes, you could definitely say I was being careless; I had a
few drinks under my belt.” Also, Mrs. Ferlito admits that she never reads product instructions from
manufacturers. If the case is brought in a state where contributory negligence is the law, on what
basis can Johnson & Johnson have the case dismissed before trial?
3.4 The Pretrial and Trial Phase
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Understand how judges can push parties into pretrial settlement.
2. Explain the meaning and use of directed verdicts.
3. Distinguish a directed verdict from a judgment n.o.v. (“notwithstanding the verdict”).
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
105
After considerable discovery, one of the parties may believe that there is no triable issue of law or fact for
the court to consider and may file a motion with the court for summary judgment. Unless it is very clear,
the judge will deny a summary judgment motion, because that ends the case at the trial level; it is a “final
order” in the case that tells the plaintiff “no” and leaves no room to bring another lawsuit against the
defendant for that particular set of facts (res judicata). If the plaintiff successfully appeals a summary
judgment motion, the case will come back to the trial court.
Prior to the trial, the judge may also convene the parties in an effort to investigate the possibilities of
settlement. Usually, the judge will explore the strengths and weaknesses of each party’s case with the
attorneys. The parties may decide that it is more prudent or efficient to settle than to risk going to trial.
Pretrial Conference
At various times during the discovery process, depending on the nature and complexity of the case, the
court may hold a pretrial conference to clarify the issues and establish a timetable. The court may also
hold a settlement conference to see if the parties can work out their differences and avoid trial altogether.
Once discovery is complete, the case moves on to trial if it has not been settled. Most cases are settled
before this stage; perhaps 85 percent of all civil cases end before trial, and more than 90 percent of
criminal prosecutions end with a guilty plea.
Trial
At trial, the first order of business is to select a jury. (In a civil case of any consequence, either party can
request one, based on the Sixth Amendment to the US Constitution.) The judge and sometimes the
lawyers are permitted to question the jurors to be sure that they are unbiased. This questioning is known
as the voir dire (pronounced vwahr-DEER). This is an important process, and a great deal of thought goes
into selecting the jury, especially in high-profile cases. A jury panel can be as few as six persons, or as
many as twelve, with alternates selected and sitting in court in case one of the jurors is unable to continue.
In a long trial, having alternates is essential; even in shorter trials, most courts will have at least two
alternate jurors.
In both criminal and civil trials, each side has opportunities to challenge potential jurors for cause. For
example, in the Robinsons’ case against Audi, the attorneys representing Audi will want to know if any 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
106
prospective jurors have ever owned an Audi, what their experience has been, and if they had a similar
problem (or worse) with their Audi that was not resolved to their satisfaction. If so, the defense attorney
could well believe that such a juror has a potential for a bias against her client. In that case, she could use
a challenge for cause, explaining to the judge the basis for her challenge. The judge, at her discretion,
could either accept the for-cause reason or reject it.
Even if an attorney cannot articulate a for-cause reason acceptable to the judge, he may use one of several
peremptory challenges that most states (and the federal system) allow. A trial attorney with many years of
experience may have a sixth sense about a potential juror and, in consultation with the client, may decide
to use a peremptory challenge to avoid having that juror on the panel.
After the jury is sworn and seated, the plaintiff’s lawyer makes an opening statement, laying out the
nature of the plaintiff’s claim, the facts of the case as the plaintiff sees them, and the evidence that the
lawyer will present. The defendant’s lawyer may also make an opening statement or may reserve his right
to do so at the end of the plaintiff’s case.
The plaintiff’s lawyer then calls witnesses and presents the physical evidence that is relevant to her proof.
The direct testimony at trial is usually far from a smooth narration. The rules of evidence (that govern the
kinds of testimony and documents that may be introduced at trial) and the question-and-answer format
tend to make the presentation of evidence choppy and difficult to follow.
Anyone who has watched an actual televised trial or a television melodrama featuring a trial scene will
appreciate the nature of the trial itself: witnesses are asked questions about a number of issues that may
or may not be related, the opposing lawyer will frequently object to the question or the form in which it is
asked, and the jury may be sent from the room while the lawyers argue at the bench before the judge.
After direct testimony of each witness is over, the opposing lawyer may conduct cross-examination. This
is a crucial constitutional right; in criminal cases it is preserved in the Constitution’s Sixth Amendment
(the right to confront one’s accusers in open court). The formal rules of direct testimony are then relaxed,
and the cross-examiner may probe the witness more informally, asking questions that may not seem
immediately relevant. This is when the opposing attorney may become harsh, casting doubt on a witness’s
credibility, trying to trip her up and show that the answers she gave are false or not to be trusted. This use
of cross-examination, along with the requirement that the witness must respond to questions that are at 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
107
all relevant to the questions raised by the case, distinguishes common-law courts from those of
authoritarian regimes around the world.
Following cross-examination, the plaintiff’s lawyer may then question the witness again: this is called
redirect examination and is used to demonstrate that the witness’s original answers were accurate and to
show that any implications otherwise, suggested by the cross-examiner, were unwarranted. The crossexaminer may then engage the witness in re-cross-examination, and so on. The process usually stops after
cross-examination or redirect.
During the trial, the judge’s chief responsibility is to see that the trial is fair to both sides. One big piece of
that responsibility is to rule on the admissibility of evidence. A judge may rule that a particular question is
out of order—that is, not relevant or appropriate—or that a given document is irrelevant. Where the
attorney is convinced that a particular witness, a particular question, or a particular document (or part
thereof) is critical to her case, she may preserve an objection to the court’s ruling by saying “exception,” in
which case the court stenographer will note the exception; on appeal, the attorney may cite any number of
exceptions as adding up to the lack of a fair trial for her client and may request a court of appeals to order
a retrial.
For the most part, courts of appeal will not reverse and remand for a new trial unless the trial court
judge’s errors are “prejudicial,” or “an abuse of discretion.” In short, neither party is entitled to a perfect
trial, but only to a fair trial, one in which the trial judge has made only “harmless errors” and not
prejudicial ones.
At the end of the plaintiff’s case, the defendant presents his case, following the same procedure just
outlined. The plaintiff is then entitled to present rebuttal witnesses, if necessary, to deny or argue with the
evidence the defendant has introduced. The defendant in turn may present “surrebuttal” witnesses.
When all testimony has been introduced, either party may ask the judge for a directed verdict—a verdict
decided by the judge without advice from the jury. This motion may be granted if the plaintiff has failed to
introduce evidence that is legally sufficient to meet her burden of proof or if the defendant has failed to do
the same on issues on which she has the burden of proof. (For example, the plaintiff alleges that the
defendant owes him money and introduces a signed promissory note. The defendant cannot show that the
note is invalid. The defendant must lose the case unless he can show that the debt has been paid or
otherwise discharged.)
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
108
The defendant can move for a directed verdict at the close of the plaintiff’s case, but the judge will usually
wait to hear the entire case until deciding whether to do so. Directed verdicts are not usually granted,
since it is the jury’s job to determine the facts in dispute.
If the judge refuses to grant a directed verdict, each lawyer will then present a closing argument to the
jury (or, if there is no jury, to the judge alone). The closing argument is used to tie up the loose ends, as
the attorney tries to bring together various seemingly unrelated facts into a story that will make sense to
the jury.
After closing arguments, the judge will instruct the jury. The purpose of jury instruction is to explain to
the jurors the meaning of the law as it relates to the issues they are considering and to tell the jurors what
facts they must determine if they are to give a verdict for one party or the other. Each lawyer will have
prepared a set of written instructions that she hopes the judge will give to the jury. These will be tailored
to advance her client’s case. Many a verdict has been overturned on appeal because a trial judge has
wrongly instructed the jury. The judge will carefully determine which instructions to give and often will
use a set of pattern instructions provided by the state bar association or the supreme court of the state.
These pattern jury instructions are often safer because they are patterned after language that appellate
courts have used previously, and appellate courts are less likely to find reversible error in the instructions.
After all instructions are given, the jury will retire to a private room and discuss the case and the answers
requested by the judge for as long as it takes to reach a unanimous verdict. Some minor cases do not
require a unanimous verdict. If the jury cannot reach a decision, this is called a hung jury, and the case
will have to be retried. When a jury does reach a verdict, it delivers it in court with both parties and their
lawyers present. The jury is then discharged, and control over the case returns to the judge. (If there is no
jury, the judge will usually announce in a written opinion his findings of fact and how the law applies to
those facts. Juries just announce their verdicts and do not state their reasons for reaching them.)
Post-trial Motions
The losing party is allowed to ask the judge for a new trial or for a judgment notwithstanding the verdict
(often called a judgment n.o.v., from the Latinnon obstante veredicto). A judge who decides that a
directed verdict is appropriate will usually wait to see what the jury’s verdict is. If it is favorable to the
party the judge thinks should win, she can rely on that verdict. If the verdict is for the other party, he can 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
109
grant the motion for judgment n.o.v. This is a safer way to proceed because if the judge is reversed on
appeal, a new trial is not necessary. The jury’s verdict always can be restored, whereas without a jury
verdict (as happens when a directed verdict is granted before the case goes to the jury), the entire case
must be presented to a new jury. Ferlito v. Johnson & Johnson (Section 3.9 "Cases") illustrates the
judgment n.o.v. process in a case where the judge allowed the case to go to a jury that was overly
sympathetic to the plaintiffs.
Rule 50(b) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure provides the authorization for federal judges making a
judgment contrary to the judgment of the jury. Most states have a similar rule.
Rule 50(b) says,
Whenever a motion for a directed verdict made at the close of all the evidence is denied or for
any reason is not granted, the court is deemed to have submitted the action to the jury subject
to a later determination of the legal questions raised by the motion. Not later than 10 days
after entry of judgment, a party who has moved for a directed verdict may move to have the
verdict and any judgment entered thereon set aside and to have judgment entered in
accordance with the party’s motion for a directed verdict.…[A] new trial may be prayed for in
the alternative. If a verdict was returned the court may allow the judgment to stand or may
reopen the judgment and either order a new trial or direct the entry of judgment as if the
requested verdict had been directed.
KEY TAKEAWAY
The purpose of a trial judge is to ensure justice to all parties to the lawsuit. The judge presides,
instructs the jury, and may limit who testifies and what they testify about what. In all of this, the judge
will usually commit some errors; occasionally these will be the kinds of errors that seriously
compromise a fair trial for both parties. Errors that do seriously compromise a fair trial for both parties
are prejudicial, as opposed to harmless. The appeals court must decide whether any errors of the trial
court judge are prejudicial or not.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
110
If a judge directs a verdict, that ends the case for the party who hasn’t asked for one; if a judge grants
judgment n.o.v., that will take away a jury verdict that one side has worked very hard to get. Thus a
judge must be careful not to unduly favor one side or the other, regardless of his or her sympathies.
EXERCISES
1. What if there was not a doctrine of res judicata? What would the legal system be like?
2. Why do you think cross-examination is a “right,” as opposed to a “good thing”? What kind of judicial
system would not allow cross-examination of witnesses as a matter of right?
3.5 Judgment, Appeal, and Execution
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Understand the post-trial process—how appellate courts process appeals.
2. Explain how a court’s judgment is translated into relief for the winning party.
Judgment or Order
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
111
At the end of a trial, the judge will enter an order that makes findings of fact (often with the help of a jury)
and conclusions of law. The judge will also make a judgment as to what relief or remedy should be given.
Often it is an award of money damages to one of the parties. The losing party may ask for a new trial at
this point or within a short period of time following. Once the trial judge denies any such request, the
judgment—in the form of the court’s order—is final.
Appeal
If the loser’s motion for a new trial or a judgment n.o.v. is denied, the losing party may appeal but must
ordinarily post a bond sufficient to ensure that there are funds to pay the amount awarded to the winning
party. In an appeal, the appellant aims to show that there was some prejudicial error committed by the
trial judge. There will be errors, of course, but the errors must be significant (i.e., not harmless). The basic
idea is for an appellate court to ensure that a reasonably fair trial was provided to both sides. Enforcement
of the court’s judgment—an award of money, an injunction—is usually stayed (postponed) until the
appellate court has ruled. As noted earlier, the party making the appeal is called the appellant, and the
party defending the judgment is the appellee (or in some courts, the petitioner and the respondent).
During the trial, the losing party may have objected to certain procedural decisions by the judge. In
compiling a record on appeal, the appellant needs to show the appellate court some examples of mistakes
made by the judge—for example, having erroneously admitted evidence, having failed to admit proper
evidence that should have been admitted, or having wrongly instructed the jury. The appellate court must
determine if those mistakes were serious enough to amount to prejudicial error.
Appellate and trial procedures are different. The appellate court does not hear witnesses or accept
evidence. It reviews the record of the case—the transcript of the witnesses’ testimony and the documents
received into evidence at trial—to try to find a legal error on a specific request of one or both of the
parties. The parties’ lawyers prepare briefs (written statements containing the facts in the case), the
procedural steps taken, and the argument or discussion of the meaning of the law and how it applies to
the facts. After reading the briefs on appeal, the appellate court may dispose of the appeal without
argument, issuing a written opinion that may be very short or many pages. Often, though, the appellate
court will hear oral argument. (This can be months, or even more than a year after the briefs are filed.)
Each lawyer is given a short period of time, usually no more than thirty minutes, to present his client’s 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
112
case. The lawyer rarely gets a chance for an extended statement because he is usually interrupted by
questions from the judges. Through this exchange between judges and lawyers, specific legal positions can
be tested and their limits explored.
Depending on what it decides, the appellate court will affirm the lower court’s
judgment, modify it, reverse it, or remand it to the lower court for retrial or other action directed by the
higher court. The appellate court itself does not take specific action in the case; it sits only to rule on
contested issues of law. The lower court must issue the final judgment in the case. As we have already
seen, there is the possibility of appealing from an intermediate appellate court to the state supreme court
in twenty-nine states and to the US Supreme Court from a ruling from a federal circuit court of appeal. In
cases raising constitutional issues, there is also the possibility of appeal to the Supreme Court from the
state courts.
Like trial judges, appellate judges must follow previous decisions, or precedent. But not every previous
case is a precedent for every court. Lower courts must respect appellate court decisions, and courts in one
state are not bound by decisions of courts in other states. State courts are not bound by decisions of
federal courts, except on points of federal law that come from federal courts within the state or from a
federal circuit in which the state court sits. A state supreme court is not bound by case law in any other
state. But a supreme court in one state with a type of case it has not previously dealt with may find
persuasive reasoning in decisions of other state supreme courts.
Federal district courts are bound by the decisions of the court of appeals in their circuit, but decisions by
one circuit court are not precedents for courts in other circuits. Federal courts are also bound by decisions
of the state supreme courts within their geographic territory in diversity jurisdiction cases. All courts are
bound by decisions of the US Supreme Court, except the Supreme Court itself, which seldom reverses
itself but on occasion has overturned its own precedents.
Not everything a court says in an opinion is a precedent. Strictly speaking, only the exact holding is
binding on the lower courts. A holding is the theory of the law that applies to the particular circumstances
presented in a case. The courts may sometimes declare what they believe to be the law with regard to
points that are not central to the case being decided. These declarations are called dicta (the
singular, dictum), and the lower courts do not have to give them the same weight as holdings.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
113
Judgment and Order
When a party has no more possible appeals, it usually pays up voluntarily. If not voluntarily, then the
losing party’s assets can be seized or its wages or other income garnished to satisfy the judgment. If the
final judgment is an injunction, failure to follow its dictates can lead to a contempt citation, with a fine or
jail time imposed.
KEY TAKEAWAY
The process of conducting a civil trial has many aspects, starting with pleadings and continuing with
motions, discovery, more motions, pretrial conferences, and finally the trial itself. At all stages, the
rules of civil procedure attempt to give both sides plenty of notice, opportunity to be heard, discovery
of relevant information, cross-examination, and the preservation of procedural objections for purposes
of appeal. All of these rules and procedures are intended to provide each side with a fair trial.
EXERCISES
1. Mrs. Robinson has a key witness on auto safety that the judge believes is not qualified as an expert.
The judge examines the witness while the jury is in the jury room and disqualifies him from testifying.
The jury does not get to hear this witness. Her attorney objects. She loses her case. What argument
would you expect Mrs. Robinson’s attorney to make in an appeal?
2. Why don’t appellate courts need a witness box for witnesses to give testimony under oath?
3. A trial judge in Nevada is wondering whether to enforce a surrogate motherhood contract.
Penelope Barr, of Reno, Nevada, has contracted with Reuben and Tina Goldberg to bear the in
vitro fertilized egg of Mrs. Goldberg. After carrying the child for nine months, Penelope gives
birth, but she is reluctant to give up the child, even though she was paid $20,000 at the start of
the contract and will earn an additional $20,000 on handing over the baby to the Goldbergs.
(Barr was an especially good candidate for surrogate motherhood: she had borne two perfect
children and at age 28 drinks no wine, does not smoke or use drugs of any kind, practices yoga,
and maintains a largely vegetarian diet with just enough meat to meet the needs of the fetus
within.)
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
114
The Goldbergs have asked the judge for an order compelling Penelope to give up the baby,
who was five days old when the lawsuit was filed. The baby is now a month old as the judge
looks in vain for guidance from any Nevada statute, federal statute, or any prior case in
Nevada that addressed the issue of surrogate motherhood. He does find several well-reasoned
cases, one from New Jersey, one from Michigan, and one from Oregon. Are any of these
“precedent” that he must follow? May he adopt the reasoning of any of these courts, if he
should find that reasoning persuasive?
3.6 When Can Someone Bring a Lawsuit?
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Explain the requirements for standing to bring a lawsuit in US courts.
2. Describe the process by which a group or class of plaintiffs can be certified to file a class action case.
Almost anyone can bring a lawsuit, assuming they have the filing fee and the help of an attorney. But the
court may not hear it, for a number of reasons. There may be no case or controversy, there may be no law 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
115
to support the plaintiff’s claim, it may be in the wrong court, too much time might have lapsed (a statute
of limitations problem), or the plaintiff may not have standing.
Case or Controversy: Standing to Sue
Article III of the US Constitution provides limits to federal judicial power. For some cases, the Supreme
Court has decided that it has no power to adjudicate because there is no “case or controversy.” For
example, perhaps the case has settled or the “real parties in interest” are not before the court. In such a
case, a court might dismiss the case on the grounds that the plaintiff does not have “standing” to sue.
For example, suppose you see a sixteen-wheel moving van drives across your neighbor’s flower bed,
destroying her beloved roses. You have enjoyed seeing her roses every summer, for years. She is forlorn
and tells you that she is not going to raise roses there anymore. She also tells you that she has decided not
to sue, because she has made the decision to never deal with lawyers if at all possible. Incensed, you
decide to sue on her behalf. But you will not have standing to sue because your person or property was not
directly injured by the moving van. Standing means that only the person whose interests are directly
affected has the legal right to sue.
The standing doctrine is easy to understand in straightforward cases such as this but is often a fairly
complicated matter. For example, can fifteen or more state attorneys general bring a lawsuit for a
declaratory judgment that the health care legislation passed in 2010 is unconstitutional? What particular
injury have they (or the states) suffered? Are they the best set of plaintiffs to raise this issue? Time—and
the Supreme Court—will tell.
Class Actions
Most lawsuits concern a dispute between two people or between a person and a company or other
organization. But it can happen that someone injures more than one person at the same time. A driver
who runs a red light may hit another car carrying one person or many people. If several people are injured
in the same accident, they each have the right to sue the driver for the damage that he caused them. Could
they sue as a group? Usually not, because the damages would probably not be the same for each person
and different facts would have to be proved at the trial. Plus, the driver of the car that was struck might
have been partially to blame, so the defendant’s liability toward him might be different from his liability
toward the passengers.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
116
If, however, the potential plaintiffs were all injured in the same way and their injuries were identical, a
single lawsuit might be a far more efficient way of determining liability and deciding financial
responsibility than many individual lawsuits.
How could such a suit be brought? All the injured parties could hire the same lawyer, and she could
present a common case. But with a group numbering more than a handful of people, it could become
overwhelmingly complicated. So how could, say, a million stockholders who believed they were cheated by
a corporation ever get together to sue?
Because of these types of situations, there is a legal procedure that permits one person or a small group of
people to serve as representatives for all others. This is the class action. The class action is provided for in
the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (Rule 23) and in the separate codes of civil procedure in the states.
These rules differ among themselves and are often complex, but in general anyone can file a class action in
an appropriate case, subject to approval of the court. Once the class is “certified,” or judged to be a legally
adequate group with common injuries, the lawyers for the named plaintiffs become, in effect, lawyers for
the entire class.
Usually a person who doesn’t want to be in the class can decide to leave. If she does, she will not be
included in an eventual judgment or settlement. But a potential plaintiff who is included in the class
cannot, after a final judgment is awarded, seek to reiterate the issue if she is dissatisfied with the outcome,
even though she did not participate at all in the legal proceeding.
KEY TAKEAWAY
Anyone can file a lawsuit, with or without the help of an attorney, but only those lawsuits where a
plaintiff has standing will be heard by the courts. Standing has become a complicated question and is
used by the courts to ensure that civil cases heard are being pursued by those with tangible and
particular injuries. Class actions are a way of aggregating claims that are substantially similar and arise
out of the same facts and circumstances.
EXERCISE
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
117
1. Fuchs Funeral Home is carrying the body of Charles Emmenthaler to its resting place at Forest
Lawn Cemetery. Charles’s wife, Chloe, and their two children, Chucky and Clarice, are following
the hearse when the coffin falls on the street, opens, and the body of Charles Emmenthaler
falls out. The wife and children are shocked and aggrieved and later sue in civil court for
damages. Assume that this is a viable cause of action based on “negligent infliction of
emotional distress” in the state of California and that Charles’s brother, sister-in-law, and
multiple cousins also were in the funeral procession and saw what happened. The brother of
Charles, Kingston Emmenthaler, also sees his brother’s body on the street, but his wife, their
three children, and some of Charles’s other cousins do not.
Charles was actually emotionally closest to Kingston’s oldest son, Nestor, who was studying
abroad at the time of the funeral and could not make it back in time. He is as emotionally
distraught at his uncle’s passing as anyone else in the family and is especially grieved over the
description of the incident and the grainy video shot by one of the cousins on his cell phone.
Who has standing to sue Fuchs Funeral Home, and who does not?
3.7 Relations with Lawyers
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Understand the various ways that lawyers charge for services.
2. Describe the contingent fee system in the United States.
3. Know the difference between the American rule and the British rule with regard to who pays
attorneys’ fees.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
118
Legal Fees
Lawyers charge for their services in one of three different ways: flat rate, hourly rate, and contingent fee.
A flat rate is used usually when the work is relatively routine and the lawyer knows in advance
approximately how long it will take her to do the job. Drawing a will or doing a real estate closing are
examples of legal work that is often paid a flat rate. The rate itself may be based on a percentage of the
worth of the matter—say, 1 percent of a home’s selling price.
Lawyers generally charge by the hour for courtroom time and for ongoing representation in commercial
matters. Virtually every sizable law firm bills its clients by hourly rates, which in large cities can range
from $300 for an associate’s time to $500 and more for a senior partner’s time.
A contingent fee is one that is paid only if the lawyer wins—that is, it is contingent, or depends upon, the
success of the case. This type of fee arrangement is used most often in personal injury cases (e.g.,
automobile accidents, products liability, and professional malpractice). Although used quite often, the
contingent fee is controversial. Trial lawyers justify it by pointing to the high cost of preparing for such
lawsuits. A typical automobile accident case can cost at least ten thousand dollars to prepare, and a
complicated products-liability case can cost tens of thousands of dollars. Few people have that kind of
money or would be willing to spend it on the chance that they might win a lawsuit. Corporate and
professional defendants complain that the contingent fee gives lawyers a license to go big game hunting,
or to file suits against those with deep pockets in the hopes of forcing them to settle.
Trial lawyers respond that the contingent fee arrangement forces them to screen cases and weed out cases
that are weak, because it is not worth their time to spend the hundreds of hours necessary on such cases if
their chances of winning are slim or nonexistent.
Costs
In England and in many other countries, the losing party must pay the legal expenses of the winning
party, including attorneys’ fees. That is not the general rule in this country. Here, each party must pay
most of its own costs, including (and especially) the fees of lawyers. (Certain relatively minor costs, such
as filing fees for various documents required in court, are chargeable to the losing side, if the judge
decides it.) This type of fee structure is known as the American rule (in contrast to the British rule).
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
119
There are two types of exceptions to the American rule. By statute, Congress and the state legislatures
have provided that the winning party in particular classes of cases may recover its full legal costs from the
loser—for example, the federal antitrust laws so provide and so does the federal Equal Access to Justice
Act. The other exception applies to litigants who either initiate lawsuits in bad faith, with no expectation
of winning, or who defend them in bad faith, in order to cause the plaintiff great expense. Under these
circumstances, a court has the discretion to award attorneys’ fees to the winner. But this rule is not
infinitely flexible, and courts do not have complete freedom to award attorneys’ fees in any amount, but
only "reasonable" attorney's fees.
KEY TAKEAWAY
Litigation is expensive. Getting a lawyer can be costly, unless you get a lawyer on a contingent fee. Not
all legal systems allow contingent fees. In many legal systems, the loser pays attorneys’ fees for both
parties.
EXERCISES
1. Mrs. Robinson’s attorney estimates that they will recover a million dollars from Volkswagen in the
Audi lawsuit. She has Mrs. Robinson sign a contract that gives her firm one-third of any recovery after
the firm’s expenses are deducted. The judge does in fact award a million dollars, and the defendant
pays. The firm’s expenses are $100,000. How much does Mrs. Robinson get?
2. Harry Potter brings a lawsuit against Draco Malfoy in Chestershire, England, for slander, a form of
defamation. Potter alleges that Malfoy insists on calling him a mud blood. Ron Weasley testifies, as
does Neville Chamberlain. But Harry loses, because the court has no conception of wizardry and
cannot make sense of the case at all. In dismissing the case, however, who (under English law) will
bear the costs of the attorneys who have brought the case for Potter and defended the matter for
Malfoy?
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
120
3.8 Alternative Means of Resolving Disputes
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Understand how arbitration and mediation are frequently used alternatives to litigation.
2. Describe the differences between arbitration and mediation.
3. Explain why arbitration is final and binding.
Disputes do not have to be settled in court. No law requires parties who have a legal dispute to seek
judicial resolution if they can resolve their disagreement privately or through some other public forum. In 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
121
fact, the threat of a lawsuit can frequently motivate parties toward private negotiation. Filing a lawsuit
may convince one party that the other party is serious. Or the parties may decide that they will come to
terms privately rather than wait the three or four years it can frequently take for a case to move up on the
court calendar.
Arbitration
Beginning around 1980, a movement toward alternative dispute resolution began to gain force throughout
the United States. Bar associations, other private groups, and the courts themselves wanted to find
quicker and cheaper ways for litigants and potential litigants to settle certain types of quarrels than
through the courts. As a result, neighborhood justice centers or dispute resolution centers have sprung up
in communities. These are where people can come for help in settling disputes, of both civil and criminal
nature, that should not consume the time and money of the parties or courts in lengthy proceedings.
These alternative forums use a variety of methods, including arbitration, mediation, and conciliation, to
bring about agreement or at least closure of the dispute. These methods are not all alike, and their
differences are worth noting.
Arbitration is a type of adjudication. The parties use a private decision maker, the arbitrator, and the rules
of procedure are considerably more relaxed than those that apply in the courtroom. Arbitrators might be
retired judges, lawyers, or anyone with the kind of specialized knowledge and training that would be
useful in making a final, binding decision on the dispute. In a contractual relationship, the parties can
decide even before a dispute arises to use arbitration when the time comes. Or parties can decide after a
dispute arises to use arbitration instead of litigation. In a pre-dispute arbitration agreement (often part of
a larger contract), the parties can spell out the rules of procedure to be used and the method for choosing
the arbitrator. For example, they may name the specific person or delegate the responsibility of choosing
to some neutral person, or they may each designate a person and the two designees may jointly pick a
third arbitrator.
Much arbitration take place under the auspices of the American Arbitration Association, a private
organization headquartered in New York, with regional offices in many other cities. The association uses
published sets of rules for various types of arbitration (e.g., labor arbitration or commercial arbitration);
parties who provide in contracts for arbitration through the association are agreeing to be bound by the 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
122
association’s rules. Similarly, the National Association of Securities Dealers provides arbitration services
for disputes between clients and brokerage firms. International commercial arbitration often takes place
through the auspices of the International Chamber of Commerce. A multilateral agreement known as the
Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Arbitral Awards provides that agreements to
arbitrate—and arbitral awards—will be enforced across national boundaries.
Arbitration has two advantages over litigation. First, it is usually much quicker, because the arbitrator
does not have a backlog of cases and because the procedures are simpler. Second, in complex cases, the
quality of the decision may be higher, because the parties can select an arbitrator with specialized
knowledge.
Under both federal and state law, arbitration is favored, and a decision rendered by an arbitrator is
binding by law and may be enforced by the courts. The arbitrator’s decision is final and binding, with very
few exceptions (such as fraud or manifest disregard of the law by the arbitrator or panel of arbitrators).
Saying that arbitration is favored means that if you have agreed to arbitration, you can’t go to court if the
other party wants you to arbitrate. Under the Federal Arbitration Act, the other party can go to court and
get a stay against your litigation and also get an order compelling you to go to arbitration.
Mediation
Unlike adjudication, mediation gives the neutral party no power to impose a decision. The mediator is a
go-between who attempts to help the parties negotiate a solution. The mediator will communicate the
parties’ positions to each other, will facilitate the finding of common ground, and will suggest outcomes.
But the parties have complete control: they may ignore the recommendations of the mediator entirely,
settle in their own way, find another mediator, agree to binding arbitration, go to court, or forget the
whole thing!
KEY TAKEAWAY
Litigation is not the only way to resolve disputes. Informal negotiation between the disputants usually
comes first, but both mediation and arbitration are available. Arbitration, though, is final and binding.
Once you agree to arbitrate, you will have a final, binding arbitral award that is enforceable through
the courts, and courts will almost never allow you to litigate after you have agreed to arbitrate.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
123
EXERCISES
1. When Mrs. Robinson buys her Audi from Seaway, there is a paragraph in the bill of sale, which both
the dealer and Mrs. Robinson sign, that says, “In the event of any complaint by customer/buyer
against Seaway regarding the vehicle purchased herein, such complaint shall not be litigated, but may
only be arbitrated under the rules of the American Arbitration Association and in accordance with
New York law.” Mrs. Robinson did not see the provision, doesn’t like it, and wants to bring a lawsuit in
Oklahoma against Seaway. What result?
2. Hendrik Koster (Netherlands) contracts with Automark, Inc. (a US company based in Illinois) to supply
Automark with a large quantity of valve cap gauges. He does, and Automark fails to pay. Koster thinks
he is owed $66,000. There is no agreement to arbitrate or mediate. Can Koster make Automark
mediate or arbitrate?
3. Suppose that there is an agreement between Koster and Automark to arbitrate. It says, “The parties
agree to arbitrate any dispute arising under this agreement in accordance with the laws of the
Netherlands and under the auspices of the International Chamber of Commerce’s arbitration facility.”
The International Chamber of Commerce has arbitration rules and will appoint an arbitrator or arbitral
panel in the event the parties cannot agree on an arbitrator. The arbitration takes place in Geneva.
Koster gets an arbitral award for $66,000 plus interest. Automark does not participate in any way. Will
a court in Illinois enforce the arbitral award?
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
124
3.9 Cases
Burger King v. Rudzewicz
Burger King Corp. v. Rudzewicz
471 U.S. 462 (U.S. Supreme Court 1985)
Summary
Burger King Corp. is a Florida corporation with principal offices in Miami. It principally conducts
restaurant business through franchisees. The franchisees are licensed to use Burger King’s trademarks
and service marks in standardized restaurant facilities. Rudzewicz is a Michigan resident who, with a
partner (MacShara) operated a Burger King franchise in Drayton Plains, Michigan. Negotiations for
setting up the franchise occurred in 1978 largely between Rudzewicz, his partner, and a regional office of 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
125
Burger King in Birmingham, Michigan, although some deals and concessions were made by Burger King
in Florida. A preliminary agreement was signed in February of 1979. Rudzewicz and MacShara assumed
operation of an existing facility in Drayton Plains and MacShara attended prescribed management
courses in Miami during the four months following Feb. 1979.
Rudzewicz and MacShara bought $165,000 worth of restaurant equipment from Burger King’s Davmor
Industries division in Miami. But before the final agreements were signed, the parties began to disagree
over site-development fees, building design, computation of monthly rent, and whether Rudzewicz and
MacShara could assign their liabilities to a corporation they had formed. Negotiations took place between
Rudzewicz, MacShara, and the Birmingham regional office; but Rudzewicz and MacShara learned that the
regional office had limited decision-making power and turned directly to Miami headquarters for their
concerns. The final agreement was signed by June 1979 and provided that the franchise relationship was
governed by Florida law, and called for payment of all required fees and forwarding of all relevant notices
to Miami headquarters.
The Drayton Plains restaurant did fairly well at first, but a recession in late 1979 caused the franchisees to
fall far behind in their monthly payments to Miami. Notice of default was sent from Miami to Rudzewicz,
who nevertheless continued to operate the restaurant as a Burger King franchise. Burger King sued in
federal district court for the southern district of Florida. Rudzewicz contested the court’s personal
jurisdiction over him, since he had never been to Florida.
The federal court looked to Florida’s long arm statute and held that it did have personal jurisdiction over
the non-resident franchisees, and awarded Burger King a quarter of a million dollars in contract damages
and enjoined the franchisees from further operation of the Drayton Plains facility. Franchisees appealed
to the 11th Circuit Court of Appeals and won a reversal based on lack of personal jurisdiction. Burger King
petitioned the Supreme Ct. for a writ of certiorari.
Justice Brennan delivered the opinion of the court.
The Due Process Clause protects an individual’s liberty interest in not being subject to the binding
judgments of a forum with which he has established no meaningful “contacts, ties, or relations.”
International Shoe Co. v. Washington. By requiring that individuals have “fair warning that a particular
activity may subject [them] to the jurisdiction of a foreign sovereign,” the Due Process Clause “gives a
degree of predictability to the legal system that allows potential defendants to structure their primary 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
126
conduct with some minimum assurance as to where that conduct will and will not render them liable to
suit.”…
Where a forum seeks to assert specific jurisdiction over an out-of-state defendant who has not consented
to suit there, this “fair warning” requirement is satisfied if the defendant has “purposefully directed” his
activities at residents of the forum, and the litigation results from alleged injuries that “arise out of or
relate to” those activities, Thus “[t]he forum State does not exceed its powers under the Due Process
Clause if it asserts personal jurisdiction over a corporation that delivers its products into the stream of
commerce with the expectation that they will be purchased by consumers in the forum State” and those
products subsequently injure forum consumers. Similarly, a publisher who distributes magazines in a
distant State may fairly be held accountable in that forum for damages resulting there from an allegedly
defamatory story.…
…[T]he constitutional touchstone remains whether the defendant purposefully established “minimum
contacts” in the forum State.…In defining when it is that a potential defendant should “reasonably
anticipate” out-of-state litigation, the Court frequently has drawn from the reasoning of Hanson v.
Denckla, 357 U.S. 235, 253 (1958):
The unilateral activity of those who claim some relationship with a nonresident defendant
cannot satisfy the requirement of contact with the forum State. The application of that rule
will vary with the quality and nature of the defendant’s activity, but it is essential in each case
that there be some act by which the defendant purposefully avails itself of the privilege of
conducting activities within the forum State, thus invoking the benefits and protections of its
laws.
This “purposeful availment” requirement ensures that a defendant will not be haled into a jurisdiction
solely as a result of “random,” “fortuitous,” or “attenuated” contacts, or of the “unilateral activity of
another party or a third person,” [Citations] Jurisdiction is proper, however, where the contacts
proximately result from actions by the defendant himself that create a “substantial connection” with the
forum State. [Citations] Thus where the defendant “deliberately” has engaged in significant activities
within a State, or has created “continuing obligations” between himself and residents of the forum, he
manifestly has availed himself of the privilege of conducting business there, and because his activities are 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
127
shielded by “the benefits and protections” of the forum’s laws it is presumptively not unreasonable to
require him to submit to the burdens of litigation in that forum as well.
Jurisdiction in these circumstances may not be avoided merely because the defendant did not physically
enter the forum State. Although territorial presence frequently will enhance a potential defendant’s
affiliation with a State and reinforce the reasonable foreseeability of suit there, it is an inescapable fact of
modern commercial life that a substantial amount of business is transacted solely by mail and wire
communications across state lines, thus obviating the need for physical presence within a State in which
business is conducted. So long as a commercial actor’s efforts are “purposefully directed” toward residents
of another State, we have consistently rejected the notion that an absence of physical contacts can defeat
personal jurisdiction there.
Once it has been decided that a defendant purposefully established minimum contacts within the forum
State, these contacts may be considered in light of other factors to determine whether the assertion of
personal jurisdiction would comport with “fair play and substantial justice.” International Shoe Co. v.
Washington, 326 U.S., at 320. Thus courts in “appropriate case[s]” may evaluate “the burden on the
defendant,” “the forum State’s interest in adjudicating the dispute,” “the plaintiff’s interest in obtaining
convenient and effective relief,” “the interstate judicial system’s interest in obtaining the most efficient
resolution of controversies,” and the “shared interest of the several States in furthering fundamental
substantive social policies.” These considerations sometimes serve to establish the reasonableness of
jurisdiction upon a lesser showing of minimum contacts than would otherwise be required. [Citations]
Applying these principles to the case at hand, we believe there is substantial record evidence supporting
the District Court’s conclusion that the assertion of personal jurisdiction over Rudzewicz in Florida for the
alleged breach of his franchise agreement did not offend due process.…
In this case, no physical ties to Florida can be attributed to Rudzewicz other than MacShara’s brief
training course in Miami. Rudzewicz did not maintain offices in Florida and, for all that appears from the
record, has never even visited there. Yet this franchise dispute grew directly out of “a contract which had a
substantial connection with that State.” Eschewing the option of operating an independent local
enterprise, Rudzewicz deliberately “reach[ed] out beyond” Michigan and negotiated with a Florida
corporation for the purchase of a long-term franchise and the manifold benefits that would derive from
affiliation with a nationwide organization. Upon approval, he entered into a carefully structured 20-year 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
128
relationship that envisioned continuing and wide-reaching contacts with Burger King in Florida. In light
of Rudzewicz’ voluntary acceptance of the long-term and exacting regulation of his business from Burger
King’s Miami headquarters, the “quality and nature” of his relationship to the company in Florida can in
no sense be viewed as “random,” “fortuitous,” or “attenuated.” Rudzewicz’ refusal to make the
contractually required payments in Miami, and his continued use of Burger King’s trademarks and
confidential business information after his termination caused foreseeable injuries to the corporation in
Florida. For these reasons it was, at the very least, presumptively reasonable for Rudzewicz to be called to
account there for such injuries.
…Because Rudzewicz established a substantial and continuing relationship with Burger King’s Miami
headquarters, received fair notice from the contract documents and the course of dealing that he might be
subject to suit in Florida, and has failed to demonstrate how jurisdiction in that forum would otherwise be
fundamentally unfair, we conclude that the District Court’s exercise of jurisdiction pursuant to Fla. Stat.
48.193(1)(g) (Supp. 1984) did not offend due process. The judgment of the Court of Appeals is accordingly
reversed, and the case is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
It is so ordered.
CASE QUESTIONS
1. Why did Burger King sue in Florida rather than in Michigan?
2. If Florida has a long-arm statute that tells Florida courts that it may exercise personal jurisdiction over
someone like Rudzewicz, why is the court talking about the due process clause?
3. Why is this case in federal court rather than in a Florida state court?
4. If this case had been filed in state court in Florida, would Rudzewicz be required to come to Florida?
Explain.
Ferlito v. Johnson & Johnson
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
129
Ferlito v. Johnson & Johnson Products, Inc.
771 F. Supp. 196 (U.S. District Ct., Eastern District of Michigan 1991)
Gadola, J.
Plaintiffs Susan and Frank Ferlito, husband and wife, attended a Halloween party in 1984 dressed as
Mary (Mrs. Ferlito) and her little lamb (Mr. Ferlito). Mrs. Ferlito had constructed a lamb costume for her
husband by gluing cotton batting manufactured by defendant Johnson & Johnson Products (“JJP”) to a
suit of long underwear. She had also used defendant’s product to fashion a headpiece, complete with ears.
The costume covered Mr. Ferlito from his head to his ankles, except for his face and hands, which were
blackened with Halloween paint. At the party Mr. Ferlito attempted to light his cigarette by using butane
lighter. The flame passed close to his left arm, and the cotton batting on his left sleeve ignited. Plaintiffs
sued defendant for injuries they suffered from burns which covered approximately one-third of Mr.
Ferlito’s body.
Following a jury verdict entered for plaintiffs November 2, 1989, the Honorable Ralph M. Freeman
entered a judgment for plaintiff Frank Ferlito in the amount of $555,000 and for plaintiff Susan Ferlito in
the amount of $ 70,000. Judgment was entered November 7, 1989. Subsequently, on November 16, 1989,
defendant JJP filed a timely motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict pursuant to Fed.R.Civ.P.
50(b) or, in the alternative, for new trial. Plaintiffs filed their response to defendant’s motion December
18, 1989; and defendant filed a reply January 4, 1990. Before reaching a decision on this motion, Judge
Freeman died. The case was reassigned to this court April 12, 1990.
MOTION FOR JUDGMENT NOTWITHSTANDING THE VERDICT
Defendant JJP filed two motions for a directed verdict, the first on October 27, 1989, at the close of
plaintiffs’ proofs, and the second on October 30, 1989, at the close of defendant’s proofs. Judge Freeman
denied both motions without prejudice. Judgment for plaintiffs was entered November 7, 1989; and
defendant’s instant motion, filed November 16, 1989, was filed in a timely manner.
The standard for determining whether to grant a j.n.o.v. is identical to the standard for evaluating a
motion for directed verdict:
In determining whether the evidence is sufficient, the trial court may neither weigh the evidence, pass on
the credibility of witnesses nor substitute its judgment for that of the jury. Rather, the evidence must be
viewed in the light most favorable to the party against whom the motion is made, drawing from that 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
130
evidence all reasonable inferences in his favor. If after reviewing the evidence…the trial court is of the
opinion that reasonable minds could not come to the result reached by the jury, then the motion for
j.n.o.v. should be granted.
To recover in a “failure to warn” product liability action, a plaintiff must prove each of the following four
elements of negligence: (1) that the defendant owed a duty to the plaintiff, (2) that the defendant violated
that duty, (3) that the defendant’s breach of that duty was a proximate cause of the damages suffered by
the plaintiff, and (4) that the plaintiff suffered damages.
To establish a prima facie case that a manufacturer’s breach of its duty to warn was a proximate cause of
an injury sustained, a plaintiff must present evidence that the product would have been used differently
had the proffered warnings been given. [1] [Citations omitted] In the absence of evidence that a warning
would have prevented the harm complained of by altering the plaintiff’s conduct, the failure to warn
cannot be deemed a proximate cause of the plaintiff’s injury as a matter of law. [In accordance with
procedure in a diversity of citizenship case, such as this one, the court cites Michigan case law as the basis
for its legal interpretation.]
…
A manufacturer has a duty “to warn the purchasers or users of its product about dangers associated with
intended use.” Conversely, a manufacturer has no duty to warn of a danger arising from an unforeseeable
misuse of its product. [Citation] Thus, whether a manufacturer has a duty to warn depends on whether
the use of the product and the injury sustained by it are foreseeable. Gootee v. Colt Industries Inc., 712
F.2d 1057, 1065 (6th Cir. 1983); Owens v. Allis-Chalmers Corp., 414 Mich. 413, 425, 326 N.W.2d 372
(1982). Whether a plaintiff’s use of a product is foreseeable is a legal question to be resolved by the court.
Trotter, supra. Whether the resulting injury is foreseeable is a question of fact for the jury. [2] Thomas v.
International Harvester Co., 57 Mich. App. 79, 225 N.W.2d 175 (1974).
In the instant action no reasonable jury could find that JJP’s failure to warn of the flammability of cotton
batting was a proximate cause of plaintiffs’ injuries because plaintiffs failed to offer any evidence to
establish that a flammability warning on JJP’s cotton batting would have dissuaded them from using the
product in the manner that they did.
Plaintiffs repeatedly stated in their response brief that plaintiff Susan Ferlito testified that “she would
never again use cotton batting to make a costume…However; a review of the trial transcript reveals that 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
131
plaintiff Susan Ferlito never testified that she would never again use cotton batting to make a costume.
More importantly, the transcript contains no statement by plaintiff Susan Ferlito that a flammability
warning on defendant JJP’s product would have dissuaded her from using the cotton batting to construct
the costume in the first place. At oral argument counsel for plaintiffs conceded that there was no
testimony during the trial that either plaintiff Susan Ferlito or her husband, plaintiff Frank J. Ferlito,
would have acted any different if there had been a flammability warning on the product’s package. The
absence of such testimony is fatal to plaintiffs’ case; for without it, plaintiffs have failed to prove
proximate cause, one of the essential elements of their negligence claim.
In addition, both plaintiffs testified that they knew that cotton batting burns when it is exposed to flame.
Susan Ferlito testified that she knew at the time she purchased the cotton batting that it would burn if
exposed to an open flame. Frank Ferlito testified that he knew at the time he appeared at the Halloween
party that cotton batting would burn if exposed to an open flame. His additional testimony that he would
not have intentionally put a flame to the cotton batting shows that he recognized the risk of injury of
which he claims JJP should have warned. Because both plaintiffs were already aware of the danger, a
warning by JJP would have been superfluous. Therefore, a reasonable jury could not have found that
JJP’s failure to provide a warning was a proximate cause of plaintiffs’ injuries.
The evidence in this case clearly demonstrated that neither the use to which plaintiffs put JJP’s product
nor the injuries arising from that use were foreseeable. Susan Ferlito testified that the idea for the
costume was hers alone. As described on the product’s package, its intended uses are for cleansing,
applying medications, and infant care. Plaintiffs’ showing that the product may be used on occasion in
classrooms for decorative purposes failed to demonstrate the foreseeability of an adult male encapsulating
himself from head to toe in cotton batting and then lighting up a cigarette.
ORDER
NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that defendant JJP’s motion for judgment
notwithstanding the verdict is GRANTED.
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that the judgment entered November 2, 1989, is SET ASIDE.
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that the clerk will enter a judgment in favor of the defendant JJP.
CASE QUESTIONS
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
132
1. The opinion focuses on proximate cause. As we will see in Chapter 7 "Introduction to Tort Law", a
negligence case cannot be won unless the plaintiff shows that the defendant has breached a duty and
that the defendant’s breach has actually and proximately caused the damage complained of. What,
exactly, is the alleged breach of duty by the defendant here?
2. Explain why Judge Gadola reasoning that JJP had no duty to warn in this case. After this case, would
they then have a duty to warn, knowing that someone might use their product in this way?
[1] By “prima facie case,” the court means a case in which the plaintiff has presented all the basic elements of the
cause of action alleged in the complaint. If one or more elements of proof are missing, then the plaintiff has fallen
short of establishing a prima facie case, and the case should be dismissed (usually on the basis of a directed
verdict).
[2] Note the division of labor here: questions of law are for the judge, while questions of “fact” are for the jury.
Here, “foreseeability” is a fact question, while the judge retains authority over questions of law. The division
between questions of fact and questions of law is not an easy one, however.
Chapter 4
Constitutional Law and US Commerce
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to do the following:
1. Explain the historical importance and basic structure of the US Constitution.
2. Know what judicial review is and what it represents in terms of the separation of powers between the
executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government.
3. Locate the source of congressional power to regulate the economy under the Constitution, and
explain what limitations there are to the reach of congressional power over interstate commerce.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
133
4. Describe the different phases of congressional power over commerce, as adjudged by the US Supreme
Court over time.
5. Explain what power the states retain over commerce, and how the Supreme Court may sometimes
limit that power.
6. Describe how the Supreme Court, under the supremacy clause of the Constitution, balances state and
federal laws that may be wholly or partly in conflict.
7. Explain how the Bill of Rights relates to business activities in the United States.
The US Constitution is the foundation for all of US law. Business and commerce are directly affected by
the words, meanings, and interpretations of the Constitution. Because it speaks in general terms, its
provisions raise all kinds of issues for scholars, lawyers, judges, politicians, and commentators. For
example, arguments still rage over the nature and meaning of “federalism,” the concept that there is
shared governance between the states and the federal government. The US Supreme Court is the ultimate
arbiter of those disputes, and as such it has a unique role in the legal system. It has assumed the power of
judicial review, unique among federal systems globally, through which it can strike down federal or state
statutes that it believes violate the Constitution and can even void the president’s executive orders if they
are contrary to the Constitution’s language. No knowledgeable citizen or businessperson can afford to be
ignorant of its basic provisions.
4.1 Basic Aspects of the US Constitution
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Describe the American values that are reflected in the US Constitution.
2. Know what federalism means, along with separation of powers.
3. Explain the process of amending the Constitution and why judicial review is particularly significant.
The Constitution as Reflecting American Values
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
134
In the US, the one document to which all public officials and military personnel pledge their unswerving
allegiance is the Constitution. If you serve, you are asked to “support and defend” the Constitution
“against all enemies, foreign and domestic.” The oath usually includes a statement that you swear that this
oath is taken freely, honestly, and without “any purpose of evasion.” This loyalty oath may be related to a
time—fifty years ago—when “un-American” activities were under investigation in Congress and the press;
the fear of communism (as antithetical to American values and principles) was paramount. As you look at
the Constitution and how it affects the legal environment of business, please consider what basic values it
may impart to us and what makes it uniquely American and worth defending “against all enemies, foreign
and domestic.”
In Article I, the Constitution places the legislature first and prescribes the ways in which representatives
are elected to public office. Article I balances influence in the federal legislature between large states and
small states by creating a Senate in which the smaller states (by population) as well as the larger states
have two votes. In Article II, the Constitution sets forth the powers and responsibilities of the branch—the
presidency—and makes it clear that the president should be the commander in chief of the armed forces.
Article II also gives states rather than individuals (through the Electoral College) a clear role in the
election process. Article III creates the federal judiciary, and the Bill of Rights, adopted in 1791, makes
clear that individual rights must be preserved against activities of the federal government. In general, the
idea of rights is particularly strong.
The Constitution itself speaks of rights in fairly general terms, and the judicial interpretation of various
rights has been in flux. The “right” of a person to own another person was notably affirmed by the
Supreme Court in the Dred Scott decision in 1857. [1] The “right” of a child to freely contract for long,
tedious hours of work was upheld by the court in Hammer v. Dagenhart in 1918. Both decisions were
later repudiated, just as the decision that a woman has a “right” to an abortion in the first trimester of
pregnancy could later be repudiated if Roe v. Wade is overturned by the Supreme Court. [2]
General Structure of the Constitution
Look at the Constitution. Notice that there are seven articles, starting with Article I (legislative powers),
Article II (executive branch), and Article III (judiciary). Notice that there is no separate article for
administrative agencies. The Constitution also declares that it is “the supreme Law of the Land” (Article 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
135
VI). Following Article VII are the ten amendments adopted in 1791 that are referred to as the Bill of
Rights. Notice also that in 1868, a new amendment, the Fourteenth, was adopted, requiring states to
provide “due process” and “equal protection of the laws” to citizens of the United States.
Federalism
The partnership created in the Constitution between the states and the federal government is
called federalism. The Constitution is a document created by the states in which certain powers are
delegated to the national government, and other powers are reserved to the states. This is made explicit in
the Tenth Amendment.
Separation of Powers and Judicial Review
Because the Founding Fathers wanted to ensure that no single branch of the government, especially the
executive branch, would be ascendant over the others, they created various checks and balances to ensure
that each of the three principal branches had ways to limit or modify the power of the others. This is
known as the separation of powers. Thus the president retains veto power, but the House of
Representatives is entrusted with the power to initiate spending bills.
Power sharing was evident in the basic design of Congress, the federal legislative branch. The basic power
imbalance was between the large states (with greater population) and the smaller ones (such as
Delaware). The smaller ones feared a loss of sovereignty if they could be outvoted by the larger ones, so
the federal legislature was constructed to guarantee two Senate seats for every state, no matter how small.
The Senate was also given great responsibility in ratifying treaties and judicial nominations. The net effect
of this today is that senators from a very small number of states can block treaties and other important
legislation. The power of small states is also magnified by the Senate’s cloture rule, which currently
requires sixty out of one hundred senators to vote to bring a bill to the floor for an up-or-down vote.
Because the Constitution often speaks in general terms (with broad phrases such as “due process” and
“equal protection”), reasonable people have disagreed as to how those terms apply in specific cases. The
United States is unique among industrialized democracies in having a Supreme Court that reserves for
itself that exclusive power to interpret what the Constitution means. The famous case of Marbury v.
Madison began that tradition in 1803, when the Supreme Court had marginal importance in the new 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
136
republic. The decision in Bush v. Gore, decided in December of 2000, illustrates the power of the court to
shape our destiny as a nation. In that case, the court overturned a ruling by the Florida Supreme Court
regarding the way to proceed on a recount of the Florida vote for the presidency. The court’s ruling was
purportedly based on the “equal protection of the laws” provision in the Fourteenth Amendment.
From Marbury to the present day, the Supreme Court has articulated the view that the US Constitution
sets the framework for all other US laws, whether statutory or judicially created. Thus any statute (or
portion thereof) or legal ruling (judicial or administrative) in conflict with the Constitution is not
enforceable. And as the Bush v. Gore decision indicates, the states are not entirely free to do what they
might choose; their own sovereignty is limited by their union with the other states in a federal sovereign.
If the Supreme Court makes a “bad decision” as to what the Constitution means, it is not easily
overturned. Either the court must change its mind (which it seldom does) or two-thirds of Congress and
three-fourths of the states must make an amendment (Article V).
Because the Supreme Court has this power of judicial review, there have been many arguments about how
it should be exercised and what kind of “philosophy” a Supreme Court justice should have. President
Richard Nixon often said that a Supreme Court justice should “strictly construe” the Constitution and not
add to its language. Finding law in the Constitution was “judicial activism” rather than “judicial restraint.”
The general philosophy behind the call for “strict constructionist” justices is that legislatures make laws in
accord with the wishes of the majority, and so unelected judges should not make law according to their
own views and values. Nixon had in mind the 1960s Warren court, which “found” rights in the
Constitution that were not specifically mentioned—the right of privacy, for example. In later years, critics
of the Rehnquist court would charge that it “found” rights that were not specifically mentioned, such as
the right of states to be free from federal antidiscrimination laws. See, for example, Kimel v. Florida
Board of Regents, or the Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission case (Section 4.6.5), which held
that corporations are “persons” with “free speech rights” that include spending unlimited amounts of
money in campaign donations and political advocacy. [3]
Because Roe v. Wade has been so controversial, this chapter includes a seminal case on “the right of
privacy,” Griswold v. Connecticut, Section 4.6.1. Was the court was correct in recognizing a “right of
privacy” in Griswold? This may not seem like a “business case,” but consider: the manufacture and
distribution of birth control devices is a highly profitable (and legal) business in every US state. Moreover, 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
137
Griswold illustrates another important and much-debated concept in US constitutional law: substantive
due process (see Section 4.5.3 "Fifth Amendment"). The problem of judicial review and its proper scope is
brought into sharp focus in the abortion controversy. Abortion became a lucrative service business
after Roe v. Wade was decided in 1973. That has gradually changed, with state laws that have limited
rather than overruled Roe v. Wade and with persistent antiabortion protests, killings of abortion doctors,
and efforts to publicize the human nature of the fetuses being aborted. The key here is to understand that
there is no explicit mention in the Constitution of any right of privacy. As Justice Harry Blackmun argued
in his majority opinion in Roe v. Wade,
The Constitution does not explicitly mention any right of privacy. In a line of decisions,
however, the Court has recognized that a right of personal privacy or a guarantee of certain
areas or zones of privacy, does exist under the Constitution.…[T]hey also make it clear that the
right has some extension to activities relating to
marriage…procreation…contraception…family relationships…and child rearing and
education.…The right of privacy…is broad enough to encompass a woman’s decision whether
or not to terminate her pregnancy.
In short, justices interpreting the Constitution wield quiet yet enormous power through judicial review. In
deciding that the right of privacy applied to a woman’s decision to abort in the first trimester, the
Supreme Court did not act on the basis of a popular mandate or clear and unequivocal language in the
Constitution, and it made illegal any state or federal legislative or executive action contrary to its
interpretation. Only a constitutional amendment or the court’s repudiation of Roe v. Wade as a precedent
could change that interpretation.
KEY TAKEAWAY
The Constitution gives voice to the idea that people have basic rights and that a civilian president is
also the commander in chief of the armed forces. It gives instructions as to how the various branches
of government must share power and also tries to balance power between the states and the federal
government. It does not expressly allow for judicial review, but the Supreme Court’s ability to declare
what laws are (or are not) constitutional has given the judicial branch a kind of power not seen in other
industrialized democracies.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
138
EXERCISES
1. Suppose the Supreme Court declares that Congress and the president cannot authorize the indefinite
detention of terrorist suspects without a trial of some sort, whether military or civilian. Suppose also
that the people of the United States favor such indefinite detention and that Congress wants to pass a
law rebuking the court’s decision. What kind of law would have to be passed, by what institutions, and
by what voting percentages?
2. When does a prior decision of the Supreme Court deserve overturning? Name one decision of the
Supreme Court that you think is no longer “good law.” Does the court have to wait one hundred years
to overturn its prior case precedents?
[1] In Scott v. Sanford (the Dred Scott decision), the court states that Scott should remain a slave, that as a slave he
is not a citizen of the United States and thus not eligible to bring suit in a federal court, and that as a slave he is
personal property and thus has never been free.
[2] Roe v. Wade, 410 US 113 (1973).
[3] Kimel v. Florida Board of Regents, 528 US 62 (2000).
4.2 The Commerce Clause
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Name the specific clause through which Congress has the power to regulate commerce. What,
specifically, does this clause say?
2. Explain how early decisions of the Supreme Court interpreted the scope of the commerce clause and
how that impacted the legislative proposals and programs of Franklin Delano Roosevelt during the
Great Depression.
3. Describe both the wider use of the commerce clause from World War II through the 1990s and the
limitations the Supreme Court imposed in Lopez and other cases.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
139
First, turn to Article I, Section 8. The commerce clause gives Congress the exclusive power to make laws
relating to foreign trade and commerce and to commerce among the various states. Most of the federally
created legal environment springs from this one clause: if Congress is not authorized in the Constitution
to make certain laws, then it acts unconstitutionally and its actions may be ruled unconstitutional by the
Supreme Court. Lately, the Supreme Court has not been shy about ruling acts of Congress
unconstitutional.
Here are the first five parts of Article I, Section 8, which sets forth the powers of the federal legislature.
The commerce clause is in boldface. It is short, but most federal legislation affecting business depends on
this very clause:
Section 8
[Clause 1] The Congress shall have Power To lay and collect Taxes, Duties, Imposts and
Excises, to pay the Debts and provide for the common Defense and general Welfare of the
United States; but all Duties, Imposts and Excises shall be uniform throughout the United
States;
[Clause 2] To borrow Money on the credit of the United States;
[Clause 3] To regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several
States, and with the Indian Tribes;
[Clause 4] To establish a uniform Rule of Naturalization, and uniform Laws on the subject of
Bankruptcies throughout the United States;
[Clause 5] To coin Money, regulate the Value thereof, and of foreign Coin, and fix the Standard
of Weights and Measures;
Early Commerce Clause Cases
For many years, the Supreme Court was very strict in applying the commerce clause: Congress could only
use it to legislate aspects of the movement of goods from one state to another. Anything else was deemed
local rather than national. For example, In Hammer v. Dagenhart, decided in 1918, a 1916 federal statute
had barred transportation in interstate commerce of goods produced in mines or factories employing 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
140
children under fourteen or employing children fourteen and above for more than eight hours a day. A
complaint was filed in the US District Court for the Western District of North Carolina by a father in his
own behalf and on behalf of his two minor sons, one under the age of fourteen years and the other
between fourteen and sixteen years, who were employees in cotton mill in Charlotte, North Carolina. The
father’s lawsuit asked the court to enjoin (block) the enforcement of the act of Congress intended to
prevent interstate commerce in the products of child labor.
The Supreme Court saw the issue as whether Congress had the power under the commerce clause to
control interstate shipment of goods made by children under the age of fourteen. The court found that
Congress did not. The court cited several cases that had considered what interstate commerce could be
constitutionally regulated by Congress. In Hipolite Egg Co. v. United States, the Supreme Court had
sustained the power of Congress to pass the Pure Food and Drug Act, which prohibited the introduction
into the states by means of interstate commerce impure foods and drugs. [1] In Hoke v. United States, the
Supreme Court had sustained the constitutionality of the so-called White Slave Traffic Act of 1910,
whereby the transportation of a woman in interstate commerce for the purpose of prostitution was
forbidden. In that case, the court said that Congress had the power to protect the channels of interstate
commerce: “If the facility of interstate transportation can be taken away from the demoralization of
lotteries, the debasement of obscene literature, the contagion of diseased cattle or persons, the impurity of
food and drugs, the like facility can be taken away from the systematic enticement to, and the enslavement
in prostitution and debauchery of women, and, more insistently, of girls.” [2]
In each of those instances, the Supreme Court said, “[T]he use of interstate transportation was necessary
to the accomplishment of harmful results.” In other words, although the power over interstate
transportation was to regulate, that could only be accomplished by prohibiting the use of the facilities of
interstate commerce to effect the evil intended. But in Hammer v. Dagenhart, that essential element was
lacking. The law passed by Congress aimed to standardize among all the states the ages at which children
could be employed in mining and manufacturing, while the goods themselves are harmless. Once the
labor is done and the articles have left the factory, the “labor of their production is over, and the mere fact
that they were intended for interstate commerce transportation does not make their production subject to
federal control under the commerce power.”
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
141
In short, the early use of the commerce clause was limited to the movement of physical goods between
states. Just because something might enter the channels of interstate commerce later on does not make it
a fit subject for national regulation. The production of articles intended for interstate commerce is a
matter of local regulation. The court therefore upheld the result from the district and circuit court of
appeals; the application of the federal law was enjoined. Goods produced by children under the age of
fourteen could be shipped anywhere in the United States without violating the federal law.
From the New Deal to the New Frontier and the Great Society: 1930s–1970
During the global depression of the 1930s, the US economy saw jobless rates of a third of all workers, and
President Roosevelt’s New Deal program required more active federal legislation. Included in the New
Deal program was the recognition of a “right” to form labor unions without undue interference from
employers. Congress created the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) in 1935 to investigate and to
enjoin employer practices that violated this right.
In NLRB v. Jones & Laughlin Steel Corporation, a union dispute with management at a large steelproducing facility near Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, became a court case. In this case, the NLRB had charged
the Jones & Laughlin Steel Corporation with discriminating against employees who were union members.
The company’s position was that the law authorizing the NLRB was unconstitutional, exceeding
Congress’s powers. The court held that the act was narrowly constructed so as to regulate industrial
activities that had the potential to restrict interstate commerce. The earlier decisions under the commerce
clause to the effect that labor relations had only an indirect effect on commerce were effectively reversed.
Since the ability of employees to engage in collective bargaining (one activity protected by the act) is “an
essential condition of industrial peace,” the national government was justified in penalizing corporations
engaging in interstate commerce that “refuse to confer and negotiate” with their workers. This was,
however, a close decision, and the switch of one justice made this ruling possible. Without this switch, the
New Deal agenda would have been effectively derailed.
The Substantial Effects Doctrine: World War II to the 1990s
Subsequent to NLRB v. Jones & Laughlin Steel Corporation, Congress and the courts generally accepted
that even modest impacts on interstate commerce were “reachable” by federal legislation. For example, 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
142
the case of Wickard v. Filburn, from 1942, represents a fairly long reach for Congress in regulating what
appear to be very local economic decisions (Section 4.6.2).
Wickard established that “substantial effects” in interstate commerce could be very local indeed! But
commerce clause challenges to federal legislation continued. In the 1960s, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 was
challenged on the ground that Congress lacked the power under the commerce clause to regulate what
was otherwise fairly local conduct. For example, Title II of the act prohibited racial discrimination in
public accommodations (such as hotels, motels, and restaurants), leading to the famous case
of Katzenbach v. McClung (1964).
Ollie McClung’s barbeque place in Birmingham, Alabama, allowed “colored” people to buy takeout at the
back of the restaurant but not to sit down with “white” folks inside. The US attorney sought a court order
to require Ollie to serve all races and colors, but Ollie resisted on commerce clause grounds: the federal
government had no business regulating a purely local establishment. Indeed, Ollie did not advertise
nationally, or even regionally, and had customers only from the local area. But the court found that some
42 percent of the supplies for Ollie’s restaurant had moved in the channels of interstate commerce. This
was enough to sustain federal regulation based on the commerce clause. [3]
For nearly thirty years following, it was widely assumed that Congress could almost always find some
interstate commerce connection for any law it might pass. It thus came as something of a shock in 1995
when the Rehnquist court decided U.S. v. Lopez. Lopez had been convicted under a federal law that
prohibited possession of firearms within 1,000 feet of a school. The law was part of a twenty-year trend
(roughly 1970 to 1990) for senators and congressmen to pass laws that were tough on crime. Lopez’s
lawyer admitted that Lopez had had a gun within 1,000 feet of a San Antonio school yard but challenged
the law itself, arguing that Congress exceeded its authority under the commerce clause in passing this
legislation. The US government’s Solicitor General argued on behalf of the Department of Justice to the
Supreme Court that Congress was within its constitutional rights under the commerce clause because
education of the future workforce was the foundation for a sound economy and because guns at or near
school yards detracted from students’ education. The court rejected this analysis, noting that with the
government’s analysis, an interstate commerce connection could be conjured from almost anything.
Lopez went free because the law itself was unconstitutional, according to the court.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
143
Congress made no attempt to pass similar legislation after the case was decided. But in passing
subsequent legislation, Congress was often careful to make a record as to why it believed it was addressing
a problem that related to interstate commerce. In 1994, Congress passed the Violence against Women Act
(VAWA), having held hearings to establish why violence against women on a local level would impair
interstate commerce. In 1994, while enrolled at Virginia Polytechnic Institute (Virginia Tech), Christy
Brzonkala alleged that Antonio Morrison and James Crawford, both students and varsity football players
at Virginia Tech, had raped her. In 1995, Brzonkala filed a complaint against Morrison and Crawford
under Virginia Tech’s sexual assault policy. After a hearing, Morrison was found guilty of sexual assault
and sentenced to immediate suspension for two semesters. Crawford was not punished. A second hearing
again found Morrison guilty. After an appeal through the university’s administrative system, Morrison’s
punishment was set aside, as it was found to be “excessive.” Ultimately, Brzonkala dropped out of the
university. Brzonkala then sued Morrison, Crawford, and Virginia Tech in federal district court, alleging
that Morrison’s and Crawford’s attack violated 42 USC Section 13981, part of the VAWA), which provides
a federal civil remedy for the victims of gender-motivated violence. Morrison and Crawford moved to
dismiss Brzonkala’s suit on the ground that Section 13981’s civil remedy was unconstitutional. In
dismissing the complaint, the district court found that that Congress lacked authority to enact Section
13981 under either the commerce clause or the Fourteenth Amendment, which Congress had explicitly
identified as the sources of federal authority for the VAWA. Ultimately, the court of appeals affirmed, as
did the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court held that Congress lacked the authority to enact a statute under the commerce clause
or the Fourteenth Amendment because the statute did not regulate an activity that substantially affected
interstate commerce nor did it redress harm caused by the state. Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist
wrote for the court that “under our federal system that remedy must be provided by the Commonwealth of
Virginia, and not by the United States.” Dissenting, Justice Stephen G. Breyer argued that the majority
opinion “illustrates the difficulty of finding a workable judicial Commerce Clause touchstone.” Justice
David H. Souter, dissenting, noted that VAWA contained a “mountain of data assembled by
Congress…showing the effects of violence against women on interstate commerce.”
The absence of a workable judicial commerce clause touchstone remains. In 1996, California voters
passed the Compassionate Use Act, legalizing marijuana for medical use. California’s law conflicted with 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
144
the federal Controlled Substances Act (CSA), which banned possession of marijuana. After the Drug
Enforcement Administration (DEA) seized doctor-prescribed marijuana from a patient’s home, a group of
medical marijuana users sued the DEA and US Attorney General John Ashcroft in federal district court.
The medical marijuana users argued that the CSA—which Congress passed using its constitutional power
to regulate interstate commerce—exceeded Congress’s commerce clause power. The district court ruled
against the group, but the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed and ruled the CSA unconstitutional
because it applied to medical marijuana use solely within one state. In doing so, the Ninth Circuit relied
on U.S. v. Lopez (1995) and U.S. v. Morrison (2000) to say that using medical marijuana did not
“substantially affect” interstate commerce and therefore could not be regulated by Congress.
But by a 6–3 majority, the Supreme Court held that the commerce clause gave Congress authority to
prohibit the local cultivation and use of marijuana, despite state law to the contrary. Justice John Paul
Stevens argued that the court’s precedents established Congress’s commerce clause power to regulate
purely local activities that are part of a “class of activities” with a substantial effect on interstate
commerce. The majority argued that Congress could ban local marijuana use because it was part of such a
class of activities: the national marijuana market. Local use affected supply and demand in the national
marijuana market, making the regulation of intrastate use “essential” to regulating the drug’s national
market.
Notice how similar this reasoning is to the court’s earlier reasoning in Wickard v. Filburn (Section 4.6.2).
In contrast, the court’s conservative wing was adamant that federal power had been exceeded. Justice
Clarence Thomas’s dissent in Gonzalez v. Raich stated that Raich’s local cultivation and consumption of
marijuana was not “Commerce…among the several States.” Representing the “originalist” view that the
Constitution should mostly mean what the Founders meant it to mean, he also said that in the early days
of the republic, it would have been unthinkable that Congress could prohibit the local cultivation,
possession, and consumption of marijuana.
KEY TAKEAWAY
The commerce clause is the basis on which the federal government regulates interstate economic
activity. The phrase “interstate commerce” has been subject to differing interpretations by the 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
145
Supreme Court over the past one hundred years. There are certain matters that are essentially local or
intrastate, but the range of federal involvement in local matters is still considerable.
EXERCISES
1. Why would Congress have power under the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to require restaurants and hotels
to not discriminate against interstate travelers on the basis of race, color, sex, religion, or national
origin? Suppose the Holiday Restaurant near I-80 in Des Moines, Iowa, has a sign that says, “We
reserve the right to refuse service to any Muslim or person of Middle Eastern descent.” Suppose also
that the restaurant is very popular locally and that only 40 percent of its patrons are travelers on I-80.
Are the owners of the Holiday Restaurant in violation of the Civil Rights Act of 1964? What would
happen if the owners resisted enforcement by claiming that Title II of the act (relating to “public
accommodations” such as hotels, motels, and restaurants) was unconstitutional?
2. If the Supreme Court were to go back to the days of Hammer v. Dagenhart and rule that only goods
and services involving interstate movement could be subject to federal law, what kinds of federal
programs might be lacking a sound basis in the commerce clause? “Obama care”? Medicare?
Homeland security? Social Security? What other powers are granted to Congress under the
Constitution to legislate for the general good of society?
[1] Hipolite Egg Co. v. United States, 220 US 45 (1911).
[2] Hoke v. United States, 227 US 308 (1913).
[3] Katzenbach v. McClung, 379 US 294 (1964).
4.3 Dormant Commerce Clause
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Understand that when Congress does not exercise its powers under the commerce clause, the
Supreme Court may still limit state legislation that discriminates against interstate commerce or
places an undue burden on interstate commerce.
2. Distinguish between “discrimination” dormant-commerce-clause cases and “undue burden” dormantcommerce-clause cases.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
146
Congress has the power to legislate under the commerce clause and often does legislate. For example,
Congress might say that trucks moving on interstate highways must not be more than seventy feet in
length. But if Congress does not exercise its powers and regulate in certain areas (such as the size and
length of trucks on interstate highways), states may make their own rules. States may do so under the socalled historic police powers of states that was never yielded up to the federal government.
These police powers can be broadly exercised by states for purposes of health, education, welfare, safety,
morals, and the environment. But the Supreme Court has reserved for itself the power to determine when
state action is excessive, even when Congress has not used the commerce clause to regulate. This power is
claimed to exist in the dormant commerce clause.
There are two ways that a state may violate the dormant commerce clause. If a state passes a law that is an
“undue burden” on interstate commerce or that “discriminates” against interstate commerce, it will be
struck down. Kassel v. Consolidated Freightways, in Section 4.7 "Summary and Exercises", is an example
of a case where Iowa imposed an undue burden on interstate commerce by prohibiting double trailers on
its highways. [1] Iowa’s prohibition was judicially declared void when the Supreme Court judged it to be an
undue burden.
Discrimination cases such as Hunt v. Washington Apple Advertising Commission (Section 4.6 "Cases")
pose a different standard. The court has been fairly inflexible here: if one state discriminates in its
treatment of any article of commerce based on its state of origin, the court will strike down the law. For
example, in Oregon Waste Systems v. Department of Environmental Quality, the state wanted to place a
slightly higher charge on waste coming from out of state. [2] The state’s reasoning was that in-state
residents had already contributed to roads and other infrastructure and that tipping fees at waste facilities
should reflect the prior contributions of in-state companies and residents. Out-of-state waste handlers
who wanted to use Oregon landfills objected and won their dormant commerce clause claim that Oregon’s
law discriminated “on its face” against interstate commerce. Under the Supreme Court’s rulings, anything
that moves in channels of interstate commerce is “commerce,” even if someone is paying to get rid of
something instead of buying something.
Thus the states are bound by Supreme Court decisions under the dormant commerce clause to do nothing
that differentiates between articles of commerce that originate from within the state from those that
originate elsewhere. If Michigan were to let counties decide for themselves whether to take garbage from 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
147
outside of the county or not, this could also be a discrimination based on a place of origin outside the
state. (Suppose, for instance, each county were to decide not to take waste from outside the county; then
all Michigan counties would effectively be excluding waste from outside of Michigan, which is
discriminatory.) [3]
The Supreme Court probably would uphold any solid waste requirements that did not differentiate on the
basis of origin. If, for example, all waste had to be inspected for specific hazards, then the law would apply
equally to in-state and out-of-state garbage. Because this is the dormant commerce clause, Congress could
still act (i.e., it could use its broad commerce clause powers) to say that states are free to keep out-of-state
waste from coming into their own borders. But Congress has declined to do so. What follows is a
statement from one of the US senators from Michigan, Carl Levin, in 2003, regarding the significant
amounts of waste that were coming into Michigan from Toronto, Canada.
Dealing with Unwelcome Waste
Senator Carl Levin, January 2003
Michigan is facing an intolerable situation with regard to the importation of waste from other
states and Canada.
Canada is the largest source of waste imports to Michigan. Approximately 65 truckloads of
waste come in to Michigan per day from Toronto alone, and an estimated 110–130 trucks
come in from Canada each day.
This problem isn’t going to get any better. Ontario’s waste shipments are growing as the
Toronto area signs new contracts for waste disposal here and closes its two remaining
landfills. At the beginning of 1999, the Toronto area was generating about 2.8 million tons of
waste annually, about 700,000 tons of which were shipped to Michigan. By early this year,
barring unforeseen developments, the entire 2.8 million tons will be shipped to Michigan for
disposal.
Why can’t Canada dispose of its trash in Canada? They say that after 20 years of searching
they have not been able to find a suitable Ontario site for Toronto’s garbage. Ontario has
about 345,000 square miles compared to Michigan’s 57,000 square miles. With six times the
land mass, that argument is laughable.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
148
The Michigan Department of Environmental Quality estimates that, for every five years of
disposal of Canadian waste at the current usage volume, Michigan is losing a full year of
landfill capacity. The environmental impacts on landfills, including groundwater
contamination, noise pollution and foul odors, are exacerbated by the significant increase in
the use of our landfills from sources outside of Michigan.
I have teamed up with Senator Stabenow and Congressman Dingell to introduce legislation
that would strengthen our ability to stop shipments of waste from Canada.
We have protections contained in a 17 year-old international agreement between the U.S. and
Canada called the Agreement Concerning the Trans-boundary Movement of Hazardous
Waste. The U.S. and Canada entered into this agreement in 1986 to allow the shipment of
hazardous waste across the U.S./Canadian border for treatment, storage or disposal. In 1992,
the two countries decided to add municipal solid waste to the agreement. To protect both
countries, the agreement requires notification of shipments to the importing country and it
also provides that the importing country may withdraw consent for shipments. Both reasons
are evidence that these shipments were intended to be limited. However, the agreement’s
provisions have not been enforced by the United States.
Canada could not export waste to Michigan without the 1986 agreement, but the U.S. has not
implemented the provisions that are designed to protect the people of Michigan. Although
those of us that introduced this legislation believe that the Environmental Protection Agency
has the authority to enforce this agreement, they have not done so. Our bill would require the
EPA [Environmental Protection Agency] to enforce the agreement.
In order to protect the health and welfare of the citizens of Michigan and our environment, we
must consider the impact of the importation of trash on state and local recycling efforts,
landfill capacity, air emissions, road deterioration resulting from increased vehicular traffic
and public health and the environment.
Our bill would require the EPA to consider these factors in determining whether to accept
imports of trash from Canada. It is my strong view that such a review should lead the EPA to
say “no” to the status quo of trash imports.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
149
KEY TAKEAWAY
Where Congress does not act pursuant to its commerce clause powers, the states are free to legislate
on matters of commerce under their historic police powers. However, the Supreme Court has set limits
on such powers. Specifically, states may not impose undue burdens on interstate commerce and may
not discriminate against articles in interstate commerce.
EXERCISES
1. Suppose that the state of New Jersey wishes to limit the amount of hazardous waste that enters into
its landfills. The general assembly in New Jersey passes a law that specifically forbids any hazardous
waste from entering into the state. All landfills are subject to tight regulations that will allow certain
kinds of hazardous wastes originating in New Jersey to be put in New Jersey landfills but that impose
significant criminal fines on landfill operators that accept out-of-state hazardous waste. The Baldessari
Brothers Landfill in Linden, New Jersey, is fined for taking hazardous waste from a New York State
transporter and appeals that ruling on the basis that New Jersey’s law is unconstitutional. What is the
result?
2. The state of Arizona determines through its legislature that trains passing through the state cannot be
longer than seventy cars. There is some evidence that in Eastern US states longer trains pose some
safety hazards. There is less evidence that long trains are a problem in Western states. Several major
railroads find the Arizona legislation costly and burdensome and challenge the legislation after
applied-for permits for longer trains are denied. What kind of dormant commerce clause challenge is
this, and what would it take for the challenge to be successful?
[1] Kassell v. Consolidated Freightways, 450 US 662 (1981).
[2] Oregon Waste Systems v. Department of Environmental Quality, 511 US 93 (1994).
[3] Fort Gratiot Sanitary Landfill v. Michigan Dep’t of Natural Resources, 504 US 353 (1992).
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
150
4.4 Preemption: The Supremacy Clause
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Understand the role of the supremacy clause in the balance between state and federal power.
2. Give examples of cases where state legislation is preempted by federal law and cases where state
legislation is not preempted by federal law.
When Congress does use its power under the commerce clause, it can expressly state that it wishes to have
exclusive regulatory authority. For example, when Congress determined in the 1950s to promote nuclear
power (“atoms for peace”), it set up the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and provided a limitation of 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
151
liability for nuclear power plants in case of a nuclear accident. The states were expressly told to stay out of
the business of regulating nuclear power or the movement of nuclear materials. Thus Rochester,
Minnesota, or Berkeley, California, could declare itself a nuclear-free zone, but the federal government
would have preempted such legislation. If Michigan wished to set safety standards at Detroit Edison’s
Fermi II nuclear reactor that were more stringent than the federal Nuclear Regulatory Commission’s
standards, Michigan’s standards would be preempted and thus be void.
Even where Congress does not expressly preempt state action, such action may be impliedly pre-empted.
States cannot constitutionally pass laws that interfere with the accomplishment of the purposes of the
federal law. Suppose, for example, that Congress passes a comprehensive law that sets standards for
foreign vessels to enter the navigable waters and ports of the United States. If a state creates a law that
sets standards that conflict with the federal law or sets standards so burdensome that they interfere with
federal law, the doctrine of preemption will (in accordance with the supremacy clause) void the state
law or whatever parts of it are inconsistent with federal law.
But Congress can allow what might appear to be inconsistencies; the existence of federal statutory
standards does not always mean that local and state standards cannot be more stringent. If California
wants cleaner air or water than other states, it can set stricter standards—nothing in the Clean Water Act
or Clean Air Act forbids the state from setting stricter pollution standards. As the auto industry well
knows, California has set stricter standards for auto emissions. Since the 1980s, most automakers have
made both a federal car and a California car, because federal Clean Air Act emissions restrictions do not
preempt more rigorous state standards.
Large industries and companies actually prefer regulation at the national level. It is easier for a large
company or industry association to lobby in Washington, DC, than to lobby in fifty different states.
Accordingly, industry often asks Congress to put preemptive language into its statutes. The tobacco
industry is a case in point.
The cigarette warning legislation of the 1960s (where the federal government required warning labels on
cigarette packages) effectively preempted state negligence claims based on failure to warn. When the
family of a lifetime smoker who had died sued in New Jersey court, one cause of action was the company’s
failure to warn of the dangers of its product. The Supreme Court reversed the jury’s award based on the
federal preemption of failure to warn claims under state law. [1]
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
152
The Supremacy Clause
Article VI
This Constitution, and the Laws of the United States which shall be made in Pursuance
thereof; and all Treaties made, or which shall be made, under the Authority of the United
States, shall be the supreme Law of the Land; and the Judges in every State shall be bound
thereby, any Thing in the Constitution or Laws of any State to the Contrary notwithstanding.
The preemption doctrine derives from the supremacy clause of the Constitution, which states that the
“Constitution and the Laws of the United States…shall be the supreme Law of the Land…any Thing in the
Constitutions or Laws of any State to the Contrary notwithstanding.” This means of course, that
any federal law—even a regulation of a federal agency—would control over any conflicting state law.
Preemption can be either express or implied. When Congress chooses to expressly preempt state law, the
only question for courts becomes determining whether the challenged state law is one that the federal law
is intended to preempt. Implied preemption presents more difficult issues. The court has to look beyond
the express language of federal statutes to determine whether Congress has “occupied the field” in which
the state is attempting to regulate, or whether a state law directly conflicts with federal law, or whether
enforcement of the state law might frustrate federal purposes.
Federal “occupation of the field” occurs, according to the court in Pennsylvania v. Nelson (1956), when
there is “no room” left for state regulation. Courts are to look to the pervasiveness of the federal scheme of
regulation, the federal interest at stake, and the danger of frustration of federal goals in making the
determination as to whether a challenged state law can stand.
In Silkwood v. Kerr-McGee (1984), the court, voting 5–4, found that a $10 million punitive damages
award (in a case litigated by famed attorney Gerry Spence) against a nuclear power plant was not
impliedly preempted by federal law. Even though the court had recently held that state regulation of the
safety aspects of a federally licensed nuclear power plant was preempted, the court drew a different
conclusion with respect to Congress’s desire to displace state tort law—even though the tort actions might
be premised on a violation of federal safety regulations.
Cipollone v. Liggett Group (1993) was a closely watched case concerning the extent of an express
preemption provision in two cigarette labeling laws of the 1960s. The case was a wrongful death action 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
153
brought against tobacco companies on behalf of Rose Cipollone, a lung cancer victim who had started
smoking cigarette in the 1940s. The court considered the preemptive effect on state law of a provision that
stated, “No requirement based on smoking and health shall be imposed under state law with respect to
the advertising and promotion of cigarettes.” The court concluded that several types of state tort actions
were preempted by the provision but allowed other types to go forward.
KEY TAKEAWAY
In cases of conflicts between state and federal law, federal law will preempt (or control) state law
because of the supremacy clause. Preemption can be express or implied. In cases where preemption is
implied, the court usually finds that compliance with both state and federal law is not possible or that a
federal regulatory scheme is comprehensive (i.e., “occupies the field”) and should not be modified by
state actions.
EXERCISES
1. For many years, the United States engaged in discussions with friendly nations as to the reciprocal use
of ports and harbors. These discussions led to various multilateral agreements between the nations as
to the configuration of oceangoing vessels and how they would be piloted. At the same time, concern
over oil spills in Puget Sound led the state of Washington to impose fairly strict standards on oil
tankers and requirements for the training of oil tanker pilots. In addition, Washington’s state law
imposed many other requirements that went above and beyond agreed-upon requirements in the
international agreements negotiated by the federal government. Are the Washington state
requirements preempted by federal law?
2. The Federal Arbitration Act of 1925 requires that all contracts for arbitration be treated as any other
contract at common law. Suppose that the state of Alabama wishes to protect its citizens from a
variety of arbitration provisions that they might enter into unknowingly. Thus the legislation provides
that all pre-dispute arbitration clauses be in bold print, that they be of twelve-point font or larger, that
they be clearly placed within the first two pages of any contract, and that they have a separate
signature line where the customer, client, or patient acknowledges having read, understood, and 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
154
signed the arbitration clause in addition to any other signatures required on the contract. The
legislation does preserve the right of consumers to litigate in the event of a dispute arising with the
product or service provider; that is, with this legislation, consumers will not unknowingly waive their
right to a trial at common law. Is the Alabama law preempted by the Federal Arbitration Act?
[1] Cippolone v. Liggett Group, 505 US 504 (1993).
4.5 Business and the Bill of Rights
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Understand and describe which articles in the Bill of Rights apply to business activities and how they
apply.
2. Explain the application of the Fourteenth Amendment—including the due process clause and the
equal protection clause—to various rights enumerated in the original Bill of Rights.
We have already seen the Fourteenth Amendment’s application in Burger King v. Rudzewicz (Section 3.9
"Cases"). In that case, the court considered whether it was constitutionally correct for a court to assert
personal jurisdiction over a nonresident. The states cannot constitutionally award a judgment against a 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
155
nonresident if doing so would offend traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice. Even if the
state’s long-arm statute would seem to allow such a judgment, other states should not give it full faith and
credit (see Article V of the Constitution). In short, a state’s long-arm statute cannot confer personal
jurisdiction that the state cannot constitutionally claim.
The Bill of Rights (the first ten amendments to the Constitution) was originally meant to apply to federal
actions only. During the twentieth century, the court began to apply selected rights to state action as well.
So, for example, federal agents were prohibited from using evidence seized in violation of the Fourth
Amendment, but state agents were not, until Mapp v. Ohio (1960), when the court applied the guarantees
(rights) of the Fourth Amendment to state action as well. In this and in similar cases, the Fourteenth
Amendment’s due process clause was the basis for the court’s action. The due process clause commanded
that states provide due process in cases affecting the life, liberty, or property of US citizens, and the court
saw in this command certain “fundamental guarantees” that states would have to observe. Over the years,
most of the important guarantees in the Bill of Rights came to apply to state as well as federal action. The
court refers to this process as selective incorporation.
Here are some very basic principles to remember:
1. The guarantees of the Bill of Rights apply only to state and federal government action. They do not
limit what a company or person in the private sector may do. For example, states may not impose
censorship on the media or limit free speech in a way that offends the First Amendment, but your
boss (in the private sector) may order you not to talk to the media.
2. In some cases, a private company may be regarded as participating in “state action.” For example, a
private defense contractor that gets 90 percent of its business from the federal government has been
held to be public for purposes of enforcing the constitutional right to free speech (the company had a
rule barring its employees from speaking out in public against its corporate position). It has even been
argued that public regulation of private activity is sufficient to convert the private into public activity,
thus subjecting it to the requirements of due process. But the Supreme Court rejected this extreme
view in 1974 when it refused to require private power companies, regulated by the state, to give
customers a hearing before cutting off electricity for failure to pay the bill. [1]
3. States have rights, too. While “states rights” was a battle cry of Southern states before the Civil War,
the question of what balance to strike between state sovereignty and federal union has never been 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
156
simple. In Kimel v. Florida, for example, the Supreme Court found in the words of the Eleventh
Amendment a basis for declaring that states may not have to obey certain federal statutes.
First Amendment
In part, the First Amendment states that “Congress shall make no law…abridging the freedom of speech,
or of the press.” The Founding Fathers believed that democracy would work best if people (and the press)
could talk or write freely, without governmental interference. But the First Amendment was also not
intended to be as absolute as it sounded. Oliver Wendell Holmes’s famous dictum that the law does not
permit you to shout “Fire!” in a crowded theater has seldom been answered, “But why not?” And no one in
1789 thought that defamation laws (torts for slander and libel) had been made unconstitutional.
Moreover, because the apparent purpose of the First Amendment was to make sure that the nation had a
continuing, vigorous debate over matters political, political speech has been given the highest level of
protection over such other forms of speech as (1) “commercial speech,” (2) speech that can and should be
limited by reasonable “time, place, and manner” restrictions, or (3) obscene speech.
Because of its higher level of protection, political speech can be false, malicious, mean-spirited, or even a
pack of lies. A public official in the United States must be prepared to withstand all kinds of false
accusations and cannot succeed in an action for defamation unless the defendant has acted with “malice”
and “reckless disregard” of the truth. Public figures, such as CEOs of the largest US banks, must also be
prepared to withstand accusations that are false. In any defamation action, truth is a defense, but a
defamation action brought by a public figure or public official must prove that the defendant not only has
his facts wrong but also lies to the public in a malicious way with reckless disregard of the truth.
Celebrities such as Lindsay Lohan and Jon Stewart have the same burden to go forward with a defamation
action. It is for this reason that the National Enquirer writes exclusively about public figures, public
officials, and celebrities; it is possible to say many things that aren’t completely true and still have the
protection of the First Amendment.
Political speech is so highly protected that the court has recognized the right of people to support political
candidates through campaign contributions and thus promote the particular viewpoints and speech of
those candidates. Fearing the influence of money on politics, Congress has from time to time placed
limitations on corporate contributions to political campaigns. But the Supreme Court has had mixed 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
157
reactions over time. Initially, the court recognized the First Amendment right of a corporation to donate
money, subject to certain limits. [2] In another case, Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce (1990), the
Michigan Campaign Finance Act prohibited corporations from using treasury money for independent
expenditures to support or oppose candidates in elections for state offices. But a corporation could make
such expenditures if it set up an independent fund designated solely for political purposes. The law was
passed on the assumption that “the unique legal and economic characteristics of corporations necessitate
some regulation of their political expenditures to avoid corruption or the appearance of corruption.”
The Michigan Chamber of Commerce wanted to support a candidate for Michigan’s House of
Representatives by using general funds to sponsor a newspaper advertisement and argued that as a
nonprofit organization, it was not really like a business firm. The court disagreed and upheld the Michigan
law. Justice Marshall found that the chamber was akin to a business group, given its activities, linkages
with community business leaders, and high percentage of members (over 75 percent) that were business
corporations. Furthermore, Justice Marshall found that the statute was narrowly crafted and
implemented to achieve the important goal of maintaining integrity in the political process. But as you
will see in Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission (Section 4.6 "Cases"), Austin was overruled;
corporations are recognized as “persons” with First Amendment political speech rights that cannot be
impaired by Congress or the states without some compelling governmental interest with restrictions on
those rights that are “narrowly tailored.”
Fourth Amendment
The Fourth Amendment says, “all persons shall be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects
from unreasonable searches and seizures, and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, before a
magistrate and upon Oath, specifically describing the persons to be searched and places to be seized.”
The court has read the Fourth Amendment to prohibit only those government searches or seizures that
are “unreasonable.” Because of this, businesses that are in an industry that is “closely regulated” can be
searched more frequently and can be searched without a warrant. In one case, an auto parts dealer at a
junkyard was charged with receiving stolen auto parts. Part of his defense was to claim that the search
that found incriminating evidence was unconstitutional. But the court found the search reasonable,
because the dealer was in a “closely regulated industry.”
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
158
In the 1980s, Dow Chemical objected to an over flight by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
The EPA had rented an airplane to fly over the Midland, Michigan, Dow plant, using an aerial mapping
camera to photograph various pipes, ponds, and machinery that were not covered by a roof. Because the
court’s precedents allowed governmental intrusions into “open fields,” the EPA search was ruled
constitutional. Because the literal language of the Fourth Amendment protected “persons, houses, papers,
and effects,” anything searched by the government in “open fields” was reasonable. (The court’s opinion
suggested that if Dow had really wanted privacy from governmental intrusion, it could have covered the
pipes and machinery that were otherwise outside and in open fields.)
Note again that constitutional guarantees like the Fourth Amendment apply to governmental action. Your
employer or any private enterprise is not bound by constitutional limits. For example, if drug testing of all
employees every week is done by government agency, the employees may have a cause of action to object
based on the Fourth Amendment. However, if a private employer begins the same kind of routine drug
testing, employees have no constitutional arguments to make; they can simply leave that employer, or
they may pursue whatever statutory or common-law remedies are available.
Fifth Amendment
The Fifth Amendment states, “No person shall be…deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due
process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just compensation.”
The Fifth Amendment has three principal aspects: procedural due process, the takings clause,
and substantive due process. In terms of procedural due process, the amendment prevents government
from arbitrarily taking the life of a criminal defendant. In civil lawsuits, it is also constitutionally essential
that the proceedings be fair. This is why, for example, the defendant in Burger King v. Rudzewicz had a
serious constitutional argument, even though he lost.
The takings clause of the Fifth Amendment ensures that the government does not take private property
without just compensation. In the international setting, governments that take private property engage in
what is called expropriation. The standard under customary international law is that when governments
do that, they must provide prompt, adequate, and effective compensation. This does not always happen,
especially where foreign owners’ property is being expropriated. The guarantees of the Fifth Amendment 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
159
(incorporated against state action by the Fourteenth Amendment) are available to property owners where
state, county, or municipal government uses the power of eminent domain to take private property for
public purposes. Just what is a public purpose is a matter of some debate. For example, if a city were to
condemn economically viable businesses or neighborhoods to construct a baseball stadium with public
money to entice a private enterprise (the baseball team) to stay, is a public purpose being served?
In Kelo v. City of New London, Mrs. Kelo and other residents fought the city of New London, in its
attempt to use powers of eminent domain to create an industrial park and recreation area that would have
Pfizer & Co. as a principal tenant. [3] The city argued that increasing its tax base was a sufficient public
purpose. In a very close decision, the Supreme Court determined that New London’s actions did not
violate the takings clause. However, political reactions in various states resulted in a great deal of new
state legislation that would limit the scope of public purpose in eminent domain takings and provide
additional compensation to property owners in many cases.
In addition to the takings clause and aspects of procedural due process, the Fifth Amendment is also the
source of what is called substantive due process. During the first third of the twentieth century, the
Supreme Court often nullified state and federal laws using substantive due process. In 1905, for example,
in Lochner v. New York, the Supreme Court voided a New York statute that limited the number of hours
that bakers could work in a single week. New York had passed the law to protect the health of employees,
but the court found that this law interfered with the basic constitutional right of private parties to freely
contract with one another. Over the next thirty years, dozens of state and federal laws were struck down
that aimed to improve working conditions, secure social welfare, or establish the rights of unions.
However, in 1934, during the Great Depression, the court reversed itself and began upholding the kinds of
laws it had struck down earlier.
Since then, the court has employed a two-tiered analysis of substantive due process claims. Under the first
tier, legislation on economic matters, employment relations, and other business affairs is subject to
minimal judicial scrutiny. This means that a law will be overturned only if it serves no rational
government purpose. Under the second tier, legislation concerning fundamental liberties is subject to
“heightened judicial scrutiny,” meaning that a law will be invalidated unless it is “narrowly tailored to
serve a significant government purpose.”
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
160
The Supreme Court has identified two distinct categories of fundamental liberties. The first category
includes most of the liberties expressly enumerated in the Bill of Rights. Through a process known as
selective incorporation, the court has interpreted the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to
bar states from denying their residents the most important freedoms guaranteed in the first ten
amendments to the federal Constitution. Only the Third Amendment right (against involuntary
quartering of soldiers) and the Fifth Amendment right to be indicted by a grand jury have not been made
applicable to the states. Because these rights are still not applicable to state governments, the Supreme
Court is often said to have “selectively incorporated” the Bill of Rights into the due process clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment.
The second category of fundamental liberties includes those liberties that are not expressly stated in the
Bill of Rights but that can be seen as essential to the concepts of freedom and equality in a democratic
society. These unstated liberties come from Supreme Court precedents, common law, moral philosophy,
and deeply rooted traditions of US legal history. The Supreme Court has stressed that he
word liberty cannot be defined by a definitive list of rights; rather, it must be viewed as a rational
continuum of freedom through which every aspect of human behavior is protected from arbitrary
impositions and random restraints. In this regard, as the Supreme Court has observed, the due process
clause protects abstract liberty interests, including the right to personal autonomy, bodily integrity, selfdignity, and self-determination.
These liberty interests often are grouped to form a general right to privacy, which was first recognized
in Griswold v. Connecticut (Section 4.6.1), where the Supreme Court struck down a state statute
forbidding married adults from using, possessing, or distributing contraceptives on the ground that the
law violated the sanctity of the marital relationship. According to Justice Douglas’s plurality opinion, this
penumbra of privacy, though not expressly mentioned in the Bill of Rights, must be protected to establish
a buffer zone or breathing space for those freedoms that are constitutionally enumerated.
But substantive due process has seen fairly limited use since the 1930s. During the 1990s, the Supreme
Court was asked to recognize a general right to die under the doctrine of substantive due process.
Although the court stopped short of establishing such a far-reaching right, certain patients may exercise a
constitutional liberty to hasten their deaths under a narrow set of circumstances. In Cruzan v. Missouri
Department of Health, the Supreme Court ruled that the due process clause guarantees the right of 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
161
competent adults to make advanced directives for the withdrawal of life-sustaining measures should they
become incapacitated by a disability that leaves them in a persistent vegetative state. [4] Once it has been
established by clear and convincing evidence that a mentally incompetent and persistently vegetative
patient made such a prior directive, a spouse, parent, or other appropriate guardian may seek to terminate
any form of artificial hydration or nutrition.
Fourteenth Amendment: Due Process and Equal Protection Guarantees
The Fourteenth Amendment (1868) requires that states treat citizens of other states with due process.
This can be either an issue of procedural due process (as in Section 3.9 "Cases", Burger King v.
Rudzewicz) or an issue of substantive due process. For substantive due process, consider what happened
in an Alabama court not too long ago. [5]
The plaintiff, Dr. Ira Gore, bought a new BMW for $40,000 from a dealer in Alabama. He later discovered
that the vehicle’s exterior had been slightly damaged in transit from Europe and had therefore been
repainted by the North American distributor prior to his purchase. The vehicle was, by best estimates,
worth about 10 percent less than he paid for it. The distributor, BMW of North America, had routinely
sold slightly damaged cars as brand new if the damage could be fixed for less than 3 percent of the cost of
the car. In the trial, Dr. Gore sought $4,000 in compensatory damages and also punitive damages. The
Alabama trial jury considered that BMW was engaging in a fraudulent practice and wanted to punish the
defendant for a number of frauds it estimated at somewhere around a thousand nationwide. The jury
awarded not only the $4,000 in compensatory damages but also $4 million in punitive damages, which
was later reduced to $2 million by the Alabama Supreme Court. On appeal to the US Supreme Court, the
court found that punitive damages may not be “grossly excessive.” If they are, then they violate
substantive due process. Whatever damages a state awards must be limited to what is reasonably
necessary to vindicate the state’s legitimate interest in punishment and deterrence.
“Equal protection of the laws” is a phrase that originates in the Fourteenth Amendment, adopted in 1868.
The amendment provides that no state shall “deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal
protection of the laws.” This is the equal protection clause. It means that, generally speaking,
governments must treat people equally. Unfair classifications among people or corporations will not be
permitted. A well-known example of unfair classification would be race discrimination: requiring white 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
162
children and black children to attend different public schools or requiring “separate but equal” public
services, such as water fountains or restrooms. Yet despite the clear intent of the 1868 amendment,
“separate but equal” was the law of the land until Brown v. Board of Education (1954). [6]
Governments make classifications every day, so not all classifications can be illegal under the equal
protection clause. People with more income generally pay a greater percentage of their income in taxes.
People with proper medical training are licensed to become doctors; people without that training cannot
be licensed and commit a criminal offense if they do practice medicine. To know what classifications are
permissible under the Fourteenth Amendment, we need to know what is being classified. The court has
created three classifications, and the outcome of any equal protection case can usually be predicted by
knowing how the court is likely to classify the case:
• Minimal scrutiny: economic and social relations. Government actions are usually upheld if there is a
rational basis for them.
• Intermediate scrutiny: gender. Government classifications are sometimes upheld.
• Strict scrutiny: race, ethnicity, and fundamental rights. Classifications based on any of these are
almost never upheld.
Under minimal scrutiny for economic and social regulation, laws that regulate economic or social issues
are presumed valid and will be upheld if they are rationally related to legitimate goals of government. So,
for example, if the city of New Orleans limits the number of street vendors to some rational number (more
than one but fewer than the total number that could possibly fit on the sidewalks), the local ordinance
would not be overturned as a violation of equal protection.
Under intermediate scrutiny, the city of New Orleans might limit the number of street vendors who are
men. For example, suppose that the city council decreed that all street vendors must be women, thinking
that would attract even more tourism. A classification like this, based on sex, will have to meet a sterner
test than a classification resulting from economic or social regulation. A law like this would have to
substantially relate to important government objectives. Increasingly, courts have nullified government
sex classifications as societal concern with gender equality has grown. (See Shannon Faulkner’s case
against The Citadel, an all-male state school.) [7]
Suppose, however, that the city of New Orleans decided that no one of Middle Eastern heritage could
drive a taxicab or be a street vendor. That kind of classification would be examined with strict scrutiny to 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
163
see if there was any compelling justification for it. As noted, classifications such as this one are almost
never upheld. The law would be upheld only if it were necessary to promote a compelling state interest.
Very few laws that have a racial or ethnic classification meet that test.
The strict scrutiny test will be applied to classifications involving racial and ethnic criteria as well as
classifications that interfere with a fundamental right. In Palmore v. Sidoti, the state refused to award
custody to the mother because her new spouse was racially different from the child. [8]This practice was
declared unconstitutional because the state had made a racial classification; this was presumptively
invalid, and the government could not show a compelling need to enforce such a classification through its
law. An example of government action interfering with a fundamental right will also receive strict
scrutiny. When New York State gave an employment preference to veterans who had been state residents
at the time of entering the military, the court declared that veterans who were new to the state were less
likely to get jobs and that therefore the statute interfered with the right to travel, which was deemed a
fundamental right. [9]
KEY TAKEAWAY
The Bill of Rights, through the Fourteenth Amendment, largely applies to state actions. The Bill of
Rights has applied to federal actions from the start. Both the Bill of Rights and the Fourteenth
Amendment apply to business in various ways, but it is important to remember that the rights
conferred are rights against governmental action and not the actions of private enterprise.
EXERCISES
1. John Hanks works at ProLogis. The company decides to institute a drug-testing policy. John is a good
and longtime employee but enjoys smoking marijuana on the weekends. The drug testing will involve
urine samples and, semiannually, a hair sample. It is nearly certain that the drug-testing protocol that
ProLogis proposes will find that Hanks is a marijuana user. The company has made it clear that it will
have zero tolerance for any kind of non-prescribed controlled substances. John and several fellow 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
164
employees wish to go to court to challenge the proposed testing as “an unreasonable search and
seizure.” Can he possibly succeed?
2. Larry Reed, majority leader in the Senate, is attacked in his reelection campaign by a series of ads
sponsored by a corporation (Global Defense, Inc.) that does not like his voting record. The corporation
is upset that Reed would not write a special provision that would favor Global Defense in a defense
appropriations bill. The ads run constantly on television and radio in the weeks immediately preceding
Election Day and contain numerous falsehoods. For example, in order to keep the government
running financially, Reed found it necessary to vote for a bill that included a last-minute rider that
defunded a small government program for the handicapped, sponsored by someone in the opposing
party that wanted to privatize all programs for the handicapped. The ad is largely paid for by Global
Defense and depicts a handicapped child being helped by the existing program and large letters saying
“Does Larry Reed Just Not Care?” The ad proclaims that it is sponsored by Citizens Who Care for a
Better Tomorrow. Is this protected speech? Why or why not? Can Reed sue for defamation? Why or
why not?
[1] Jackson v. Metropolitan Edison Co., 419 US 345 (1974).
[2] Buckley v. Valeo, 424 US 1 (1976).
[3] Kelo v. City of New London, 545 US 469 (2005).
[4] Cruzan v. Missouri Department of Health, 497 US 261 (1990).
[5] BMW of North America, Inc. v. Gore, 517 U.S. 559 (1996)
[6] Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 US 537 (1896).
[7] United States v. Virginia, 518 US 515 (1996).
[8] Palmore v. Sidoti, 466 US 429 (1984).
[9] Atty. Gen. of New York v. Soto-Lopez, 476 US 898 (1986).
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
165
4.6 Cases
Griswold v. Connecticut
Griswold v. Connecticut
381 U.S. 479 (U.S. Supreme Court 1965)
A nineteenth-century Connecticut law made the use, possession, or distribution of birth control devices
illegal. The law also prohibited anyone from giving information about such devices. The executive
director and medical director of a Planned Parenthood association were found guilty of giving out such
information to a married couple that wished to delay having children for a few years. The directors
were fined $100 each.
They appealed throughout the Connecticut state court system, arguing that the state law violated
(infringed) a basic or fundamental right of privacy of a married couple: to live together and have sex 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
166
together without the restraining power of the state to tell them they may legally have intercourse but
not if they use condoms or other birth control devices. At each level (trial court, court of appeals, and
Connecticut Supreme Court), the Connecticut courts upheld the constitutionality of the convictions.
Plurality Opinion by Justice William O. Douglass
We do not sit as a super legislature to determine the wisdom, need, and propriety of laws that touch
economic problems, business affairs, or social conditions. The [Connecticut] law, however, operates
directly on intimate relation of husband and wife and their physician’s role in one aspect of that relation.
[Previous] cases suggest that specific guarantees in the Bill of Rights have penumbras, formed by
emanations from those guarantees that help give them life and substance…Various guarantees create
zones of privacy. The right of association contained in the penumbra of the First Amendment is one. The
Third Amendment in its prohibition against the quartering of soldiers “in any house” in time of peace
without the consent of the owner is another facet of that privacy. The Fourth Amendment explicitly
affirms the “right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers and effects, against
unreasonable searches and seizures.” The Fifth Amendment in its Self-Incrimination Clause enables the
citizen to create a zone of privacy which the government may not force him to surrender to his detriment.
The Ninth Amendment provides: “The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be
construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people.”
The Fourth and Fifth Amendments were described…as protection against all governmental invasions “of
the sanctity of a man’s home and the privacies of life.” We recently referred in Mapp v. Ohio…to the
Fourth Amendment as creating a “right to privacy, no less important than any other right carefully and
particularly reserved to the people.”
[The law in question here], in forbidding the use of contraceptives rather than regulating their
manufacture or sale, seeks to achieve its goals by having a maximum destructive impact on [the marital]
relationship. Such a law cannot stand. Would we allow the police to search the sacred precincts of marital
bedrooms for telltale signs of the use of contraceptives? The very idea is repulsive to the notions of privacy
surrounding the marital relationship.
We deal with a right of privacy older than the Bill of Rights—older than our political parties, older than
our school system. Marriage is a coming together for better or for worse, hopefully enduring, and intimate
to the degree of being sacred. It is an association that promotes a way of life, not causes; a harmony in 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
167
living, not political faiths; a bilateral loyalty, not commercial or social projects. Yet it is an association for
as noble a purpose as any involved in our prior decisions.
Mr. Justice Stewart, whom Mr. Justice Black joins, is dissenting.
Since 1879 Connecticut has had on its books a law which forbids the use of contraceptives by anyone. I
think this is an uncommonly silly law. As a practical matter, the law is obviously unenforceable, except in
the oblique context of the present case. As a philosophical matter, I believe the use of contraceptives in the
relationship of marriage should be left to personal and private choice, based upon each individual’s moral,
ethical, and religious beliefs. As a matter of social policy, I think professional counsel about methods of
birth control should be available to all, so that each individual’s choice can be meaningfully made. But we
are not asked in this case to say whether we think this law is unwise, or even asinine. We are asked to hold
that it violates the United States Constitution. And that I cannot do.
In the course of its opinion the Court refers to no less than six Amendments to the Constitution: the First,
the Third, the Fourth, the Fifth, the Ninth, and the Fourteenth. But the Court does not say which of these
Amendments, if any, it thinks is infringed by this Connecticut law.
…
As to the First, Third, Fourth, and Fifth Amendments, I can find nothing in any of them to invalidate this
Connecticut law, even assuming that all those Amendments are fully applicable against the States. It has
not even been argued that this is a law “respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free
exercise thereof.” And surely, unless the solemn process of constitutional adjudication is to descend to the
level of a play on words, there is not involved here any abridgment of “the freedom of speech, or of the
press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of
grievances.” No soldier has been quartered in any house. There has been no search, and no seizure.
Nobody has been compelled to be a witness against himself.
The Court also quotes the Ninth Amendment, and my Brother Goldberg’s concurring opinion relies
heavily upon it. But to say that the Ninth Amendment has anything to do with this case is to turn
somersaults with history. The Ninth Amendment, like its companion the Tenth, which this Court held
“states but a truism that all is retained which has not been surrendered,” United States v. Darby, 312 U.S.
100, 124, was framed by James Madison and adopted by the States simply to make clear that the adoption
of the Bill of Rights did not alter the plan that the Federal Government was to be a government of express 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
168
and limited powers, and that all rights and powers not delegated to it were retained by the people and the
individual States. Until today no member of this Court has ever suggested that the Ninth Amendment
meant anything else, and the idea that a federal court could ever use the Ninth Amendment to annul a law
passed by the elected representatives of the people of the State of Connecticut would have caused James
Madison no little wonder.
What provision of the Constitution, then, does make this state law invalid? The Court says it is the right of
privacy “created by several fundamental constitutional guarantees.” With all deference, I can find no such
general right of privacy in the Bill of Rights, in any other part of the Constitution, or in any case ever
before decided by this Court.
At the oral argument in this case we were told that the Connecticut law does not “conform to current
community standards.” But it is not the function of this Court to decide cases on the basis of community
standards. We are here to decide cases “agreeably to the Constitution and laws of the United States.” It is
the essence of judicial duty to subordinate our own personal views, our own ideas of what legislation is
wise and what is not. If, as I should surely hope, the law before us does not reflect the standards of the
people of Connecticut, the people of Connecticut can freely exercise their true Ninth and Tenth
Amendment rights to persuade their elected representatives to repeal it. That is the constitutional way to
take this law off the books.
CASE QUESTIONS
1. Which opinion is the strict constructionist opinion here—Justice Douglas’s or that of Justices Stewart
and Black?
2. What would have happened if the Supreme Court had allowed the Connecticut Supreme Court
decision to stand and followed Justice Black’s reasoning? Is it likely that the citizens of Connecticut
would have persuaded their elected representatives to repeal the law challenged here?
Wickard v. Filburn
Wickard v. Filburn
317 U.S. 111 (U.S. Supreme Court 1942)
Mr. Justice Jackson delivered the opinion of the Court.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
169
Mr. Filburn for many years past has owned and operated a small farm in Montgomery County, Ohio,
maintaining a herd of dairy cattle, selling milk, raising poultry, and selling poultry and eggs. It has been
his practice to raise a small acreage of winter wheat, sown in the Fall and harvested in the following July;
to sell a portion of the crop; to feed part to poultry and livestock on the farm, some of which is sold; to use
some in making flour for home consumption; and to keep the rest for the following seeding.
His 1941 wheat acreage allotment was 11.1 acres and a normal yield of 20.1 bushels of wheat an acre. He
sowed, however, 23 acres, and harvested from his 11.9 acres of excess acreage 239 bushels, which under
the terms of the Act as amended on May 26, 1941, constituted farm marketing excess, subject to a penalty
of 49 cents a bushel, or $117.11 in all.
The general scheme of the Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1938 as related to wheat is to control the
volume moving in interstate and foreign commerce in order to avoid surpluses and shortages and the
consequent abnormally low or high wheat prices and obstructions to commerce. [T]he Secretary of
Agriculture is directed to ascertain and proclaim each year a national acreage allotment for the next crop
of wheat, which is then apportioned to the states and their counties, and is eventually broken up into
allotments for individual farms.
It is urged that under the Commerce Clause of the Constitution, Article I, § 8, clause 3, Congress does not
possess the power it has in this instance sought to exercise. The question would merit little consideration
since our decision in United States v. Darby, 312 U.S. 100, sustaining the federal power to regulate
production of goods for commerce, except for the fact that this Act extends federal regulation to
production not intended in any part for commerce but wholly for consumption on the farm.
Kassel v. Consolidated Freightways Corp.
Kassel v. Consolidated Freightways Corp.
450 U.S. 662 (U.S. Supreme Court 1981)
JUSTICE POWELL announced the judgment of the Court and delivered an opinion, in which JUSTICE
WHITE, JUSTICE BLACKMUN, and JUSTICE STEVENS joined.
The question is whether an Iowa statute that prohibits the use of certain large trucks within the State
unconstitutionally burdens interstate commerce.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
170
I
Appellee Consolidated Freightways Corporation of Delaware (Consolidated) is one of the largest common
carriers in the country: it offers service in 48 States under a certificate of public convenience and necessity
issued by the Interstate Commerce Commission. Among other routes, Consolidated carries commodities
through Iowa on Interstate 80, the principal east-west route linking New York, Chicago, and the west
coast, and on Interstate 35, a major north-south route.
Consolidated mainly uses two kinds of trucks. One consists of a three-axle tractor pulling a 40-foot twoaxle trailer. This unit, commonly called a single, or “semi,” is 55 feet in length overall. Such trucks have
long been used on the Nation’s highways. Consolidated also uses a two-axle tractor pulling a single-axle
trailer which, in turn, pulls a single-axle dolly and a second single-axle trailer. This combination, known
as a double, or twin, is 65 feet long overall. Many trucking companies, including Consolidated,
increasingly prefer to use doubles to ship certain kinds of commodities. Doubles have larger capacities,
and the trailers can be detached and routed separately if necessary. Consolidated would like to use 65-foot
doubles on many of its trips through Iowa.
The State of Iowa, however, by statute, restricts the length of vehicles that may use its highways. Unlike all
other States in the West and Midwest, Iowa generally prohibits the use of 65-foot doubles within its
borders.
…
Because of Iowa’s statutory scheme, Consolidated cannot use its 65-foot doubles to move commodities
through the State. Instead, the company must do one of four things: (i) use 55-foot singles; (ii) use 60-foot
doubles; (iii) detach the trailers of a 65-foot double and shuttle each through the State separately; or (iv)
divert 65-foot doubles around Iowa. Dissatisfied with these options, Consolidated filed this suit in the
District Court averring that Iowa’s statutory scheme unconstitutionally burdens interstate commerce.
Iowa defended the law as a reasonable safety measure enacted pursuant to its police power. The State
asserted that 65-foot doubles are more dangerous than 55-foot singles and, in any event, that the law
promotes safety and reduces road wear within the State by diverting much truck traffic to other states.
In a 14-day trial, both sides adduced evidence on safety and on the burden on interstate commerce
imposed by Iowa’s law. On the question of safety, the District Court found that the “evidence clearly
establishes that the twin is as safe as the semi.” 475 F.Supp. 544, 549 (SD Iowa 1979). For that reason, 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
171
“there is no valid safety reason for barring twins from Iowa’s highways because of their
configuration.…The evidence convincingly, if not overwhelmingly, establishes that the 65-foot twin is as
safe as, if not safer than, the 60-foot twin and the 55-foot semi.…”
“Twins and semis have different characteristics. Twins are more maneuverable, are less sensitive to wind,
and create fewer splashes and spray. However, they are more likely than semis to jackknife or upset. They
can be backed only for a short distance. The negative characteristics are not such that they render the twin
less safe than semis overall. Semis are more stable, but are more likely to ‘rear-end’ another vehicle.”
In light of these findings, the District Court applied the standard we enunciated in Raymond Motor
Transportation, Inc. v. Rice, 434 U.S. 429 (1978), and concluded that the state law impermissibly
burdened interstate commerce: “[T]he balance here must be struck in favor of the federal interests.
The total effect of the law as a safety measure in reducing accidents and casualties is so slight and
problematical that it does not outweigh the national interest in keeping interstate commerce free from
interferences that seriously impede it.”
The Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit affirmed. 612 F.2d 1064 (1979). It accepted the District Court’s
finding that 65-foot doubles were as safe as 55-foot singles. Id. at 1069. Thus, the only apparent safety
benefit to Iowa was that resulting from forcing large trucks to detour around the State, thereby reducing
overall truck traffic on Iowa’s highways. The Court of Appeals noted that this was not a constitutionally
permissible interest. It also commented that the several statutory exemptions identified above, such as
those applicable to border cities and the shipment of livestock, suggested that the law, in effect, benefited
Iowa residents at the expense of interstate traffic. Id. at 1070-1071. The combination of these exemptions
weakened the presumption of validity normally accorded a state safety regulation. For these reasons, the
Court of Appeals agreed with the District Court that the Iowa statute unconstitutionally burdened
interstate commerce.
Iowa appealed, and we noted probable jurisdiction. 446 U.S. 950 (1980). We now affirm.
II
It is unnecessary to review in detail the evolution of the principles of Commerce Clause adjudication. The
Clause is both a “prolific ‘ of national power and an equally prolific source of conflict with legislation of the
state[s].” H. P. Hood & Sons, Inc. v. Du Mond, 336 U.S. 525, 336 U.S. 534 (1949). The Clause permits 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
172
Congress to legislate when it perceives that the national welfare is not furthered by the independent
actions of the States. It is now well established, also, that the Clause itself is “a limitation upon state power
even without congressional implementation.” Hunt v. Washington Apple Advertising Comm’n, 432 U.S.
333 at 350 (1977). The Clause requires that some aspects of trade generally must remain free from
interference by the States. When a State ventures excessively into the regulation of these aspects of
commerce, it “trespasses upon national interests,” Great A&P Tea Co. v. Cottrell, 424 U.S. 366, 424 U.S.
373 (1976), and the courts will hold the state regulation invalid under the Clause alone.
The Commerce Clause does not, of course, invalidate all state restrictions on commerce. It has long been
recognized that, “in the absence of conflicting legislation by Congress, there is a residuum of power in the
state to make laws governing matters of local concern which nevertheless in some measure affect
interstate commerce or even, to some extent, regulate it.” Southern Pacific Co. v. Arizona, 325 U.S. 761
(1945).
The extent of permissible state regulation is not always easy to measure. It may be said with confidence,
however, that a State’s power to regulate commerce is never greater than in matters traditionally of local
concern. Washington Apple Advertising Comm’n, supra at 432 U.S. 350. For example, regulations that
touch upon safety—especially highway safety—are those that “the Court has been most reluctant to
invalidate.” Raymond, supra at 434 U.S. 443 (and other cases cited). Indeed, “if safety justifications are
not illusory, the Court will not second-guess legislative judgment about their importance in comparison
with related burdens on interstate commerce.” Raymond, supra at 434 U.S. at 449. Those who would
challenge such bona fide safety regulations must overcome a “strong presumption of validity.” Bibb v.
Navajo Freight Lines, Inc., 359 U.S. 520 at (1959).
But the incantation of a purpose to promote the public health or safety does not insulate a state law from
Commerce Clause attack. Regulations designed for that salutary purpose nevertheless may further the
purpose so marginally, and interfere with commerce so substantially, as to be invalid under the
Commerce Clause. In the Court’s recent unanimous decision in Raymond we declined to “accept the
State’s contention that the inquiry under the Commerce Clause is ended without a weighing of the
asserted safety purpose against the degree of interference with interstate commerce.” This “weighing” by a
court requires—and indeed the constitutionality of the state regulation depends on—“a sensitive
consideration of the weight and nature of the state regulatory concern in light of the extent of the burden 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
173
imposed on the course of interstate commerce.” Id. at 434 U.S. at 441; accord, Pike v. Bruce Church, Inc.,
397 U.S. 137 at 142 (1970); Bibb, supra, at 359 U.S. at 525-530.
III
Applying these general principles, we conclude that the Iowa truck length limitations unconstitutionally
burden interstate commerce.
In Raymond Motor Transportation, Inc. v. Rice, the Court held that a Wisconsin statute that precluded
the use of 65-foot doubles violated the Commerce Clause. This case is Raymond revisited. Here, as
in Raymond, the State failed to present any persuasive evidence that 65-foot doubles are less safe than 55-
foot singles. Moreover, Iowa’s law is now out of step with the laws of all other Midwestern and Western
States. Iowa thus substantially burdens the interstate flow of goods by truck. In the absence of
congressional action to set uniform standards, some burdens associated with state safety regulations must
be tolerated. But where, as here, the State’s safety interest has been found to be illusory, and its
regulations impair significantly the federal interest in efficient and safe interstate transportation, the state
law cannot be harmonized with the Commerce Clause.
A
Iowa made a more serious effort to support the safety rationale of its law than did Wisconsin in Raymond,
but its effort was no more persuasive. As noted above, the District Court found that the “evidence clearly
establishes that the twin is as safe as the semi.” The record supports this finding. The trial focused on a
comparison of the performance of the two kinds of trucks in various safety categories. The evidence
showed, and the District Court found, that the 65-foot double was at least the equal of the 55-foot single in
the ability to brake, turn, and maneuver. The double, because of its axle placement, produces less splash
and spray in wet weather. And, because of its articulation in the middle, the double is less susceptible to
dangerous “off-tracking,” and to wind.
None of these findings is seriously disputed by Iowa. Indeed, the State points to only three ways in which
the 55-foot single is even arguably superior: singles take less time to be passed and to clear intersections;
they may back up for longer distances; and they are somewhat less likely to jackknife.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
174
The first two of these characteristics are of limited relevance on modern interstate highways. As the
District Court found, the negligible difference in the time required to pass, and to cross intersections, is
insignificant on 4-lane divided highways, because passing does not require crossing into oncoming traffic
lanes, Raymond, 434 U.S. at 444, and interstates have few, if any, intersections. The concern over backing
capability also is insignificant, because it seldom is necessary to back up on an interstate. In any event, no
evidence suggested any difference in backing capability between the 60-foot doubles that Iowa permits
and the 65-foot doubles that it bans. Similarly, although doubles tend to jackknife somewhat more than
singles 65-foot doubles actually are less likely to jackknife than 60-foot doubles.
Statistical studies supported the view that 65-foot doubles are at least as safe overall as 55-foot singles and
60-foot doubles. One such study, which the District Court credited, reviewed Consolidates comparative
accident experience in 1978 with its own singles and doubles. Each kind of truck was driven 56 million
miles on identical routes. The singles were involved in 100 accidents resulting in 27 injuries and one
fatality. The 65-foot doubles were involved in 106 accidents resulting in 17 injuries and one fatality. Iowa’s
expert statistician admitted that this study provided “moderately strong evidence” that singles have a
higher injury rate than doubles. Another study, prepared by the Iowa Department of Transportation at the
request of the state legislature, concluded that “[s]ixty-five foot twin trailer combinations have not been
shown by experiences in other states to be less safe than 60-foot twin trailer
combinations or conventional tractor-semitrailers.”
In sum, although Iowa introduced more evidence on the question of safety than did Wisconsin
in Raymond, the record as a whole was not more favorable to the State.
B
Consolidated, meanwhile, demonstrated that Iowa’s law substantially burdens interstate commerce.
Trucking companies that wish to continue to use 65-foot doubles must route them around Iowa or detach
the trailers of the doubles and ship them through separately. Alternatively, trucking companies must use
the smaller 55-foot singles or 65-foot doubles permitted under Iowa law. Each of these options engenders
inefficiency and added expense. The record shows that Iowa’s law added about $12.6 million each year to
the costs of trucking companies.
Consolidated alone incurred about $2 million per year in increased costs.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
175
In addition to increasing the costs of the trucking companies (and, indirectly, of the service to
consumers), Iowa’s law may aggravate, rather than, ameliorate, the problem of highway accidents. Fiftyfive-foot singles carry less freight than 65-foot doubles. Either more small trucks must be used to carry the
same quantity of goods through Iowa or the same number of larger trucks must drive longer distances to
bypass Iowa. In either case, as the District Court noted, the restriction requires more highway miles to be
driven to transport the same quantity of goods. Other things being equal, accidents are proportional to
distance traveled. Thus, if 65-foot doubles are as safe as 55-foot singles, Iowa’s law tends to increase the
number of accidents and to shift the incidence of them from Iowa to other States.
[IV. Omitted]
V
In sum, the statutory exemptions, their history, and the arguments Iowa has advanced in support of its
law in this litigation all suggest that the deference traditionally accorded a State’s safety judgment is not
warranted. See Raymond, supra at 434 U.S. at 444-447. The controlling factors thus are the findings of
the District Court, accepted by the Court of Appeals, with respect to the relative safety of the types of
trucks at issue, and the substantiality of the burden on interstate commerce.
Because Iowa has imposed this burden without any significant countervailing safety interest, its statute
violates the Commerce Clause. The judgment of the Court of Appeals is affirmed.
It is so ordered.
CASE QUESTIONS
1. Under the Constitution, what gives Iowa the right to make rules regarding the size or configuration of
trucks upon highways within the state?
2. Did Iowa try to exempt trucking lines based in Iowa, or was the statutory rule nondiscriminatory as to
the origin of trucks that traveled on Iowa highways?
3. Are there any federal size or weight standards noted in the case? Is there any kind of truck size or
weight that could be limited by Iowa law, or must Iowa simply accept federal standards or, if none,
impose no standards at all?
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
176
Hunt v. Washington Apple Advertising Commission
Hunt v. Washington Apple Advertising Commission
432 U.S. 33 (U.S. Supreme Court 1977)
MR. CHIEF JUSTICE BURGER delivered the opinion of the Court.
In 1973, North Carolina enacted a statute which required, inter alia, all closed containers of apples sold,
offered for sale, or shipped into the State to bear “no grade other than the applicable U.S. grade or
standard.”…Washington State is the Nation’s largest producer of apples, its crops accounting for
approximately 30% of all apples grown domestically and nearly half of all apples shipped in closed
containers in interstate commerce. [Because] of the importance of the apple industry to the State, its
legislature has undertaken to protect and enhance the reputation of Washington apples by establishing a
stringent, mandatory inspection program [that] requires all apples shipped in interstate commerce to be
tested under strict quality standards and graded accordingly. In all cases, the Washington State grades
[are] the equivalent of, or superior to, the comparable grades and standards adopted by the [U.S. Dept. of]
Agriculture (USDA).
[In] 1972, the North Carolina Board of Agriculture adopted an administrative regulation, unique in the 50
States, which in effect required all closed containers of apples shipped into or sold in the State to display
either the applicable USDA grade or a notice indicating no classification. State grades were expressly
prohibited. In addition to its obvious consequence—prohibiting the display of Washington State apple
grades on containers of apples shipped into North Carolina—the regulation presented the Washington
apple industry with a marketing problem of potentially nationwide significance. Washington apple
growers annually ship in commerce approximately 40 million closed containers of apples, nearly 500,000
of which eventually find their way into North Carolina stamped with the applicable Washington State
variety and grade. [Compliance] with North Carolina’s unique regulation would have required
Washington growers to obliterate the printed labels on containers shipped to North Carolina, thus giving
their product a damaged appearance. Alternatively, they could have changed their marketing practices to
accommodate the needs of the North Carolina market, i.e., repack apples to be shipped to North Carolina
in containers bearing only the USDA grade, and/or store the estimated portion of the harvest destined for
that market in such special containers. As a last resort, they could discontinue the use of the preprinted 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
177
containers entirely. None of these costly and less efficient options was very attractive to the industry.
Moreover, in the event a number of other States followed North Carolina’s lead, the resultant inability to
display the Washington grades could force the Washington growers to abandon the State’s expensive
inspection and grading system which their customers had come to know and rely on over the 60-odd
years of its existence.…
Unsuccessful in its attempts to secure administrative relief [with North Carolina], the Commission
instituted this action challenging the constitutionality of the statute. [The] District Court found that the
North Carolina statute, while neutral on its face, actually discriminated against Washington State growers
and dealers in favor of their local counterparts [and] concluded that this discrimination [was] not justified
by the asserted local interest—the elimination of deception and confusion from the marketplace—arguably
furthered by the [statute].
…
[North Carolina] maintains that [the] burdens on the interstate sale of Washington apples were far
outweighed by the local benefits flowing from what they contend was a valid exercise of North Carolina’s
[police powers]. Prior to the statute’s enactment,…apples from 13 different States were shipped into North
Carolina for sale. Seven of those States, including [Washington], had their own grading systems which,
while differing in their standards, used similar descriptive labels (e.g., fancy, extra fancy, etc.). This
multiplicity of inconsistent state grades [posed] dangers of deception and confusion not only in the North
Carolina market, but in the Nation as a whole. The North Carolina statute, appellants claim, was enacted
to eliminate this source of deception and confusion. [Moreover], it is contended that North Carolina
sought to accomplish this goal of uniformity in an evenhanded manner as evidenced by the fact that its
statute applies to all apples sold in closed containers in the State without regard to their point of origin.
[As] the appellants properly point out, not every exercise of state authority imposing some burden on the
free flow of commerce is invalid, [especially] when the State acts to protect its citizenry in matters
pertaining to the sale of foodstuffs. By the same token, however, a finding that state legislation furthers
matters of legitimate local concern, even in the health and consumer protection areas, does not end the
inquiry. Rather, when such state legislation comes into conflict with the Commerce Clause’s overriding
requirement of a national “common market,” we are confronted with the task of effecting an
accommodation of the competing national and local interests. We turn to that task.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
178
As the District Court correctly found, the challenged statute has the practical effect of not only burdening
interstate sales of Washington apples, but also discriminating against them. This discrimination takes
various forms. The first, and most obvious, is the statute’s consequence of raising the costs of doing
business in the North Carolina market for Washington apple growers and dealers, while leaving those of
their North Carolina counterparts unaffected. [This] disparate effect results from the fact that North
Carolina apple producers, unlike their Washington competitors, were not forced to alter their marketing
practices in order to comply with the statute. They were still free to market their wares under the USDA
grade or none at all as they had done prior to the statute’s enactment. Obviously, the increased costs
imposed by the statute would tend to shield the local apple industry from the competition of Washington
apple growers and dealers who are already at a competitive disadvantage because of their great distance
from the North Carolina market.
Second, the statute has the effect of stripping away from the Washington apple industry the competitive
and economic advantages it has earned for itself through its expensive inspection and grading system. The
record demonstrates that the Washington apple-grading system has gained nationwide acceptance in the
apple trade. [The record] contains numerous affidavits [stating a] preference [for] apples graded under
the Washington, as opposed to the USDA, system because of the former’s greater consistency, its
emphasis on color, and its supporting mandatory inspections. Once again, the statute had no similar
impact on the North Carolina apple industry and thus operated to its benefit.
Third, by prohibiting Washington growers and dealers from marketing apples under their State’s grades,
the statute has a leveling effect which insidiously operates to the advantage of local apple producers.
[With] free market forces at work, Washington sellers would normally enjoy a distinct market advantage
vis-à-vis local producers in those categories where the Washington grade is superior. However, because of
the statute’s operation, Washington apples which would otherwise qualify for and be sold under the
superior Washington grades will now have to be marketed under their inferior USDA counterparts. Such
“downgrading” offers the North Carolina apple industry the very sort of protection against competing outof-state products that the Commerce Clause was designed to prohibit. At worst, it will have the effect of an
embargo against those Washington apples in the superior grades as Washington dealers withhold them
from the North Carolina market. At best, it will deprive Washington sellers of the market premium that
such apples would otherwise command.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
179
Despite the statute’s facial neutrality, the Commission suggests that its discriminatory impact on
interstate commerce was not an unintended by-product, and there are some indications in the record to
that effect. The most glaring is the response of the North Carolina Agriculture Commissioner to the
Commission’s request for an exemption following the statute’s passage in which he indicated that before
he could support such an exemption, he would “want to have the sentiment from our apple
producers since they were mainly responsible for this legislation being passed.” [Moreover], we find it
somewhat suspect that North Carolina singled out only closed containers of apples, the very means by
which apples are transported in commerce, to effectuate the statute’s ostensible consumer protection
purpose when apples are not generally sold at retail in their shipping containers. However, we need not
ascribe an economic protection motive to the North Carolina Legislature to resolve this case; we conclude
that the challenged statute cannot stand insofar as it prohibits the display of Washington State grades
even if enacted for the declared purpose of protecting consumers from deception and fraud in the
marketplace.
…
Finally, we note that any potential for confusion and deception created by the Washington grades was not
of the type that led to the statute’s enactment. Since Washington grades are in all cases equal or superior
to their USDA counterparts, they could only “deceive” or “confuse” a consumer to his benefit, hardly a
harmful result.
In addition, it appears that nondiscriminatory alternatives to the outright ban of Washington State grades
are readily available. For example, North Carolina could effectuate its goal by permitting out-of-state
growers to utilize state grades only if they also marked their shipments with the applicable USDA label. In
that case, the USDA grade would serve as a benchmark against which the consumer could evaluate the
quality of the various state grades.…
[The court affirmed the lower court’s holding that the North Carolina statute was unconstitutional.]
CASE QUESTIONS
1. Was the North Carolina law discriminatory on its face? Was it, possibly, an undue burden on interstate
commerce? Why wouldn’t it be?
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
180
2. What evidence was there of discriminatory intent behind the North Carolina law? Did that evidence
even matter? Why or why not?
Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission
Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission
588 U.S. ____; 130 S.Ct. 876 (U.S. Supreme Court 2010)
Justice Kennedy delivered the opinion of the Court.
Federal law prohibits corporations and unions from using their general treasury funds to make
independent expenditures for speech defined as an “electioneering communication” or for speech
expressly advocating the election or defeat of a candidate. 2 U.S.C. §441b. Limits on electioneering
communications were upheld in McConnell v. Federal Election Comm’n, 540 U.S. 93, 203–209 (2003).
The holding of McConnell rested to a large extent on an earlier case; Austin v. Michigan Chamber of
Commerce, 494 U.S. 652 (1990).Austin had held that political speech may be banned based on the
speaker’s corporate identity.
In this case we are asked to reconsider Austin and, in effect, McConnell. It has been noted that
“Austin was a significant departure from ancient First Amendment principles,” Federal Election Comm’n
v. Wisconsin Right to Life, Inc., 551 U.S. 449, 490 (2007) (WRTL) (Scalia, J., concurring in part and
concurring in judgment). We agree with that conclusion and hold that stare decisis does not compel the
continued acceptance of Austin. The Government may regulate corporate political speech through
disclaimer and disclosure requirements, but it may not suppress that speech altogether. We turn to the
case now before us.
I
A
Citizens United is a nonprofit corporation. It has an annual budget of about $12 million. Most of its funds
are from donations by individuals; but, in addition, it accepts a small portion of its funds from for-profit
corporations.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
181
In January 2008, Citizens United released a film entitled Hillary: The Movie. We refer to the film
as Hillary. It is a 90-minute documentary about then-Senator Hillary Clinton, who was a candidate in the
Democratic Party’s 2008 Presidential primary elections. Hillary mentions Senator Clinton by name and
depicts interviews with political commentators and other persons, most of them quite critical of Senator
Clinton.…
In December 2007, a cable company offered, for a payment of $1.2 million, to make Hillary available on a
video-on-demand channel called “Elections ’08.”…Citizens United was prepared to pay for the video-ondemand; and to promote the film; it produced two 10-second ads and one 30-second ad for Hillary. Each
ad includes a short (and, in our view, pejorative) statement about Senator Clinton, followed by the name
of the movie and the movie’s Website address. Citizens United desired to promote the video-on-demand
offering by running advertisements on broadcast and cable television.
B
Before the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002 (BCRA), federal law prohibited—and still does
prohibit—corporations and unions from using general treasury funds to make direct contributions to
candidates or independent expenditures that expressly advocate the election or defeat of a candidate,
through any form of media, in connection with certain qualified federal elections.…BCRA §203 amended
§441b to prohibit any “electioneering communication” as well. An electioneering communication is
defined as “any broadcast, cable, or satellite communication” that “refers to a clearly identified candidate
for Federal office” and is made within 30 days of a primary or 60 days of a general election. §434(f)(3)(A).
The Federal Election Commission’s (FEC) regulations further define an electioneering communication as
a communication that is “publicly distributed.” 11 CFR §100.29(a)(2) (2009). “In the case of a candidate
for nomination for President…publicly distributed means” that the communication “[c]an be received by
50,000 or more persons in a State where a primary election…is being held within 30 days.” 11 CFR
§100.29(b)(3)(ii). Corporations and unions are barred from using their general treasury funds for express
advocacy or electioneering communications. They may establish, however, a “separate segregated fund”
(known as a political action committee, or PAC) for these purposes. 2 U.S.C. §441b (b)(2). The moneys
received by the segregated fund are limited to donations from stockholders and employees of the
corporation or, in the case of unions, members of the union. Ibid.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
182
C
Citizens United wanted to make Hillary available through video-on-demand within 30 days of the 2008
primary elections. It feared, however, that both the film and the ads would be covered by §441b’s ban on
corporate-funded independent expenditures, thus subjecting the corporation to civil and criminal
penalties under §437g. In December 2007, Citizens United sought declaratory and injunctive relief against
the FEC. It argued that (1) §441b is unconstitutional as applied to Hillary; and (2) BCRA’s disclaimer and
disclosure requirements, BCRA §§201 and 311, are unconstitutional as applied to Hillary and to the three
ads for the movie.
The District Court denied Citizens United’s motion for a preliminary injunction, and then granted the
FEC’s motion for summary judgment.
…
The court held that §441b was facially constitutional under McConnell, and that §441b was constitutional
as applied to Hillary because it was “susceptible of no other interpretation than to inform the electorate
that Senator Clinton is unfit for office, that the United States would be a dangerous place in a President
Hillary Clinton world, and that viewers should vote against her.” 530 F. Supp. 2d, at 279. The court also
rejected Citizens United’s challenge to BCRA’s disclaimer and disclosure requirements. It noted that “the
Supreme Court has written approvingly of disclosure provisions triggered by political speech even though
the speech itself was constitutionally protected under the First Amendment.” Id. at 281.
II
[Omitted: the court considers whether it is possible to reject the BCRA without declaring certain
provisions unconstitutional. The court concludes it cannot find a basis to reject the BCRA that does not
involve constitutional issues.]
III
The First Amendment provides that “Congress shall make no law…abridging the freedom of speech.”
Laws enacted to control or suppress speech may operate at different points in the speech process…The law 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
183
before us is an outright ban, backed by criminal sanctions. Section 441b makes it a felony for all
corporations—including nonprofit advocacy corporations—either to expressly advocate the election or
defeat of candidates or to broadcast electioneering communications within 30 days of a primary election
and 60 days of a general election. Thus, the following acts would all be felonies under §441b: The Sierra
Club runs an ad, within the crucial phase of 60 days before the general election, that exhorts the public to
disapprove of a Congressman who favors logging in national forests; the National Rifle Association
publishes a book urging the public to vote for the challenger because the incumbent U.S. Senator supports
a handgun ban; and the American Civil Liberties Union creates a Web site telling the public to vote for a
Presidential candidate in light of that candidate’s defense of free speech. These prohibitions are classic
examples of censorship.
Section 441b is a ban on corporate speech notwithstanding the fact that a PAC created by a corporation
can still speak. PACs are burdensome alternatives; they are expensive to administer and subject to
extensive regulations. For example, every PAC must appoint a treasurer, forward donations to the
treasurer promptly, keep detailed records of the identities of the persons making donations, preserve
receipts for three years, and file an organization statement and report changes to this information within
10 days.
And that is just the beginning. PACs must file detailed monthly reports with the FEC, which are due at
different times depending on the type of election that is about to occur.…
PACs have to comply with these regulations just to speak. This might explain why fewer than 2,000 of the
millions of corporations in this country have PACs. PACs, furthermore, must exist before they can speak.
Given the onerous restrictions, a corporation may not be able to establish a PAC in time to make its views
known regarding candidates and issues in a current campaign.
Section 441b’s prohibition on corporate independent expenditures is thus a ban on speech. As a
“restriction on the amount of money a person or group can spend on political communication during a
campaign,” that statute “necessarily reduces the quantity of expression by restricting the number of issues
discussed, the depth of their exploration, and the size of the audience reached.” Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S.
1 at 19 (1976)…
Speech is an essential mechanism of democracy, for it is the means to hold officials accountable to the
people. See Buckley, supra, at 14–15 (“In a republic where the people are sovereign, the ability of the 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
184
citizenry to make informed choices among candidates for office is essential.”) The right of citizens to
inquire, to hear, to speak, and to use information to reach consensus is a precondition to enlightened selfgovernment and a necessary means to protect it. The First Amendment “‘has its fullest and most urgent
application’ to speech uttered during a campaign for political office.”
For these reasons, political speech must prevail against laws that would suppress it, whether by design or
inadvertence. Laws that burden political speech are “subject to strict scrutiny,” which requires the
Government to prove that the restriction “furthers a compelling interest and is narrowly tailored to
achieve that interest.”
…
The Court has recognized that First Amendment protection extends to corporations. This protection has
been extended by explicit holdings to the context of political speech. Under the rationale of these
precedents, political speech does not lose First Amendment protection “simply because its source is a
corporation.” Bellotti, supra, at 784. The Court has thus rejected the argument that political speech of
corporations or other associations should be treated differently under the First Amendment simply
because such associations are not “natural persons.”
The purpose and effect of this law is to prevent corporations, including small and nonprofit corporations,
from presenting both facts and opinions to the public. This makes Austin’s anti-distortion rationale all the
more an aberration. “[T]he First Amendment protects the right of corporations to petition legislative and
administrative bodies.” Bellotti, 435 U.S., at 792, n. 31…
Even if §441b’s expenditure ban were constitutional, wealthy corporations could still lobby elected
officials, although smaller corporations may not have the resources to do so. And wealthy individuals and
un-incorporated associations can spend unlimited amounts on independent expenditures. See,
e.g., WRTL, 551 U.S., at 503–504 (opinion of Scalia, J.) (“In the 2004 election cycle, a mere 24 individuals
contributed an astounding total of $142 million to [26 U.S.C. §527 organizations]”). Yet certain disfavored
associations of citizens—those that have taken on the corporate form—are penalized for engaging in the
same political speech.
When Government seeks to use its full power, including the criminal law, to command where a person
may get his or her information or what distrusted source he or she may not hear, it uses censorship to
control thought. This is unlawful. The First Amendment confirms the freedom to think for ourselves.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
185
What we have said also shows the invalidity of other arguments made by the Government. For the most
part relinquishing the anti-distortion rationale, the Government falls back on the argument that corporate
political speech can be banned in order to prevent corruption or its appearance.…
When Congress finds that a problem exists, we must give that finding due deference; but Congress may
not choose an unconstitutional remedy. If elected officials succumb to improper influences from
independent expenditures; if they surrender their best judgment; and if they put expediency before
principle, then surely there is cause for concern. We must give weight to attempts by Congress to seek to
dispel either the appearance or the reality of these influences. The remedies enacted by law, however,
must comply with the First Amendment; and, it is our law and our tradition that more speech, not less, is
the governing rule. An outright ban on corporate political speech during the critical pre-election period is
not a permissible remedy. Here Congress has created categorical bans on speech that are asymmetrical to
preventing quid pro quo-corruption.
Our precedent is to be respected unless the most convincing of reasons demonstrates that adherence to it
puts us on a course that is sure error. “Beyond workability, the relevant factors in deciding whether to
adhere to the principle of stare decisis include the antiquity of the precedent, the reliance interests at
stake, and of course whether the decision was well reasoned.” [citing prior cases]
These considerations counsel in favor of rejecting Austin, which itself contravened this Court’s earlier
precedents in Buckley and Bellotti. “This Court has not hesitated to overrule decisions offensive to the
First Amendment.”WRTL, 551 U.S., at 500 (opinion of Scalia, J.). “[S]tare decisis is a principle of policy
and not a mechanical formula of adherence to the latest decision. “Helvering v. Hallock, 309 U.S. 106 at
119 (1940).
Austin is undermined by experience since its announcement. Political speech is so ingrained in our
culture that speakers find ways to circumvent campaign finance laws. See, e.g., McConnell, 540 U.S., at
176–177 (“Given BCRA’s tighter restrictions on the raising and spending of soft money, the incentives…to
exploit [26 U.S.C. §527] organizations will only increase”). Our Nation’s speech dynamic is changing, and
informative voices should not have to circumvent onerous restrictions to exercise their First Amendment
rights. Speakers have become adept at presenting citizens with sound bites, talking points, and scripted
messages that dominate the 24-hour news cycle. Corporations, like individuals, do not have monolithic 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
186
views. On certain topics corporations may possess valuable expertise, leaving them the best equipped to
point out errors or fallacies in speech of all sorts, including the speech of candidates and elected officials.
Rapid changes in technology—and the creative dynamic inherent in the concept of free expression—
counsel against upholding a law that restricts political speech in certain media or by certain speakers.
Today, 30-second television ads may be the most effective way to convey a political message. Soon,
however, it may be that Internet sources, such as blogs and social networking Web sites, will provide
citizens with significant information about political candidates and issues. Yet, §441b would seem to ban a
blog post expressly advocating the election or defeat of a candidate if that blog were created with
corporate funds. The First Amendment does not permit Congress to make these categorical distinctions
based on the corporate identity of the speaker and the content of the political speech.
Due consideration leads to this conclusion: Austin should be and now is overruled. We return to the
principle established in Buckley and Bellotti that the Government may not suppress political speech on
the basis of the speaker’s corporate identity. No sufficient governmental interest justifies limits on the
political speech of nonprofit or for-profit corporations.
[IV. Omitted]
V
When word concerning the plot of the movie Mr. Smith Goes to Washington reached the circles of
Government, some officials sought, by persuasion, to discourage its distribution. See Smoodin,
“Compulsory” Viewing for Every Citizen: Mr. Smith and the Rhetoric of Reception, 35 Cinema Journal 3,
19, and n. 52 (Winter 1996) (citing Mr. Smith Riles Washington, Time, Oct. 30, 1939, p. 49); Nugent,
Capra’s Capitol Offense, N. Y. Times, Oct. 29, 1939, p. X5. Under Austin, though, officials could have done
more than discourage its distribution—they could have banned the film. After all, it, like Hillary, was
speech funded by a corporation that was critical of Members of Congress. Mr. Smith Goes to
Washington may be fiction and caricature; but fiction and caricature can be a powerful force.
Modern day movies, television comedies, or skits on YouTube.com might portray public officials or public
policies in unflattering ways. Yet if a covered transmission during the blackout period creates the
background for candidate endorsement or opposition, a felony occurs solely because a corporation, other
than an exempt media corporation, has made the “purchase, payment, distribution, loan, advance, 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
187
deposit, or gift of money or anything of value” in order to engage in political speech. 2 U.S.C.
§431(9)(A)(i). Speech would be suppressed in the realm where its necessity is most evident: in the public
dialogue preceding a real election. Governments are often hostile to speech, but under our law and our
tradition it seems stranger than fiction for our Government to make this political speech a crime. Yet this
is the statute’s purpose and design.
Some members of the public might consider Hillary to be insightful and instructive; some might find it to
be neither high art nor a fair discussion on how to set the Nation’s course; still others simply might
suspend judgment on these points but decide to think more about issues and candidates. Those choices
and assessments, however, are not for the Government to make. “The First Amendment underwrites the
freedom to experiment and to create in the realm of thought and speech. Citizens must be free to use new
forms, and new forums, for the expression of ideas. The civic discourse belongs to the people, and the
Government may not prescribe the means used to conduct it.” McConnell, supra, at 341 (opinion of
Kennedy, J.).
The judgment of the District Court is reversed with respect to the constitutionality of 2 U.S.C. §441b’s
restrictions on corporate independent expenditures. The case is remanded for further proceedings
consistent with this opinion.
It is so ordered.
CASE QUESTIONS
1. What does the case say about disclosure? Corporations have a right of free speech under the First
Amendment and may exercise that right through unrestricted contributions of money to political
parties and candidates. Can the government condition that right by requiring that the parties and
candidates disclose to the public the amount and origin of the contribution? What would justify such a
disclosure requirement?
2. Are a corporation’s contributions to political parties and candidates tax deductible as a business
expense? Should they be?
3. How is the donation of money equivalent to speech? Is this a strict construction of the Constitution to
hold that it is?
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
188
4. Based on the Court’s description of the Austin case, what purpose do you think the Austin court was
trying to achieve by limiting corporate campaign contributions? Was that purpose consistent (or
inconsistent) with anything in the Constitution, or is the Constitution essentially silent on this issue?
4.7 Summary and Exercises
Summary
The U.S. Constitution sets the framework for all other laws of the United States, at both the federal and
the state level. It creates a shared balance of power between states and the federal government
(federalism) and shared power among the branches of government (separation of powers), establishes
individual rights against governmental action (Bill of Rights), and provides for federal oversight of
matters affecting interstate commerce and commerce with foreign nations. Knowing the contours of the
US legal system is not possible without understanding the role of the US Constitution.
The Constitution is difficult to amend. Thus when the Supreme Court uses its power of judicial review to
determine that a law is unconstitutional, it actually shapes what the Constitution means. New meanings
that emerge must do so by the process of amendment or by the passage of time and new appointments to
the court. Because justices serve for life, the court changes its philosophical outlook slowly.
The Bill of Rights is an especially important piece of the Constitutional framework. It provides legal
causes of action for infringements of individual rights by government, state or federal. Through the due 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
189
process clause of the Fifth Amendment and the Fourteenth Amendment, both procedural and (to some
extent) substantive due process rights are given to individuals.
EXERCISES
1. For many years, the Supreme Court believed that “commercial speech” was entitled to less
protection than other forms of speech. One defining element of commercial speech is that its
dominant theme is to propose a commercial transaction. This kind of speech is protected by
the First Amendment, but the government is permitted to regulate it more closely than other
forms of speech. However, the government must make reasonable distinctions, must narrowly
tailor the rules restricting commercial speech, and must show that government has a
legitimate goal that the law furthers.
Edward Salib owned a Winchell’s Donut House in Mesa, Arizona. To attract customers, he
displayed large signs in store windows. The city ordered him to remove the signs because they
violated the city’s sign code, which prohibited covering more than 30 percent of a store’s
windows with signs. Salib sued, claiming that the sign code violated his First Amendment
rights. What was the result, and why?
2. Jennifer is a freshman at her local public high school. Her sister, Jackie, attends a nearby private high
school. Neither school allows them to join its respective wrestling team; only boys can wrestle at
either school. Does either of them have a winning case based on the equal protection clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment?
3. The employees of the US Treasury Department that work the border crossing between the United
States and Mexico learned that they will be subject to routine drug testing. The customs bureau,
which is a division of the treasury department, announces this policy along with its reasoning: since
customs agents must routinely search for drugs coming into the United States, it makes sense that
border guards must themselves be completely drug-free. Many border guards do not use drugs, have
no intention of using drugs, and object to the invasion of their privacy. What is the constitutional basis
for their objection?
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
190
4. Happy Time Chevrolet employs Jim Bydalek as a salesman. Bydalek takes part in a Gay Pride March in
Los Angeles, is interviewed by a local news camera crew, and reports that he is gay and proud of it. His
employer is not, and he is fired. Does he have any constitutional causes of action against his
employer?
5. You begin work at the Happy-Go-Lucky Corporation on Halloween. On your second day at work, you
wear a political button on your coat, supporting your choice for US senator in the upcoming election.
Your boss, who is of a different political persuasion, looks at the button and says, “Take that stupid
button off or you’re fired.” Has your boss violated your constitutional rights?
6. David Lucas paid $975,000 for two residential parcels on the Isle of Palms near Charleston, South
Carolina. His intention was to build houses on them. Two years later, the South Carolina legislature
passed a statute that prohibited building beachfront properties. The purpose was to leave the dunes
system in place to mitigate the effects of hurricanes and strong storms. The South Carolina Coastal
Commission created the rules and regulations with substantial input from the community and from
experts and with protection of the dune system primarily in mind. People had been building on the
shoreline for years, with harmful results to localities and the state treasury. When Lucas applied for
permits to build two houses near the shoreline, his permits were rejected. He sued, arguing that the
South Carolina legislation had effectively “taken” his property. At trial, South Carolina conceded that
because of the legislation, Lucas’s property was effectively worth zero. Has there been a taking under
the Fifth Amendment (as incorporated through the Fourteenth Amendment), and if so, what should
the state owe to Lucas? Suppose that Lucas could have made an additional $1 million by building a
house on each of his parcels. Is he entitled to recover his original purchase price or his potential
profits?
SELF -TEST QUESTIONS
1. Harvey filed a suit against the state of Colorado, claiming that a Colorado state law violates the
commerce clause. The court will agree if the statute
a. places an undue burden on interstate commerce
b. promotes the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare of Colorado
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
191
c. regulates economic activities within the state’s borders
d. a and b
e. b and c
The state legislature in Maine enacts a law that directly conflicts with a federal law. Mapco
Industries, located in Portland, Maine, cannot comply with both the state and the federal law.
a. Because of federalism, the state law will have priority, as long as Maine is using its police
powers.
b. Because there’s a conflict, both laws are invalid; the state and the federal government will
have to work out a compromise of some sort.
c. The federal law preempts the state law.
d. Both laws govern concurrently.
Hannah, who lives in Ada, is the owner of Superior Enterprises, Inc. She believes that certain
actions in the state of Ohio infringe on her federal constitutional rights, especially those found
in the Bill of Rights. Most of these rights apply to the states under
a. the supremacy clause
b. the protection clause
c. the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment
d. the Tenth Amendment
Minnesota enacts a statute that bans all advertising that is in “bad taste,” “vulgar,” or
“indecent.” In Michigan, Aaron Calloway and his brother, Clarence “Cab” Calloway, create
unique beer that they decide to call Old Fart Ale. In their marketing, the brothers have a label
in which an older man in a dirty T-shirt is sitting in easy chair, looking disheveled and having a
three-day growth of stubble on his chin. It appears that the man is in the process of belching.
He is also holding a can of Old Fart Ale. The Minnesota liquor commission orders all Minnesota
restaurants, bars, and grocery stores to remove Old Fart Ale from their shelves. The state
statute and the commission’s order are likely to be held by a court to be
a. a violation of the Tenth Amendment
b. a violation of the First Amendment
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
192
c. a violation of the Calloways’ right to equal protection of the laws
d. a violation of the commerce clause, since only the federal laws can prevent an article of
commerce from entering into Minnesota’s market
Raunch Unlimited, a Virginia partnership, sells smut whenever and wherever it can. Some of
its material is “obscene” (meeting the Supreme Court’s definition under Miller v. California)
and includes child pornography. North Carolina has a statute that criminalizes obscenity. What
are possible results if a store in Raleigh, North Carolina, carries Raunch merchandise?
a. The partners could be arrested in North Carolina and may well be convicted.
b. The materials in Raleigh may be the basis for a criminal conviction.
c. The materials are protected under the First Amendment’s right of free speech.
d. The materials are protected under state law.
e. a and b
SELF -TEST ANSWERS
1. a
2. c
3. c
4. b
5. e
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
193
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
194
Chapter 5
Administrative Law
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to do the following:
1. Understand the purpose served by federal administrative agencies.
2. Know the difference between executive branch agencies and independent agencies.
3. Understand the political control of agencies by the president and Congress.
4. Describe how agencies make rules and conduct hearings.
5. Describe how courts can be used to challenge administrative rulings.
From the 1930s on, administrative agencies, law, and procedures have virtually remade our government
and much of private life. Every day, business must deal with rules and decisions of state and federal
administrative agencies. Informally, such rules are often called regulations, and they differ (only in their
source) from laws passed by Congress and signed into law by the president. The rules created by agencies
are voluminous: thousands of new regulations pour forth each year. The overarching question of whether
there is too much regulation—or the wrong kind of regulation—of our economic activities is an important
one but well beyond the scope of this chapter, in which we offer an overview of the purpose of
administrative agencies, their structure, and their impact on business.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
195
5.1 Administrative Agencies: Their Structure and Powers
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Explain the reasons why we have federal administrative agencies.
2. Explain the difference between executive branch agencies and independent agencies.
3. Describe the constitutional issue that questions whether administrative agencies could have authority
to make enforceable rules that affect business.
Why Have Administrative Agencies?
The US Constitution mentions only three branches of government: legislative, executive, and judicial
(Articles I, II, and III). There is no mention of agencies in the Constitution, even though federal agencies
are sometimes referred to as “the fourth branch of government.” The Supreme Court has recognized the
legitimacy of federal administrative agencies to make rules that have the same binding effect as statutes
by Congress.
Most commentators note that having agencies with rule-making power is a practical necessity: (1)
Congress does not have the expertise or continuity to develop specialized knowledge in various areas (e.g.,
communications, the environment, aviation). (2) Because of this, it makes sense for Congress to set forth
broad statutory guidance to an agency and delegate authority to the agency to propose rules that further
the statutory purposes. (3) As long as Congress makes this delegating guidance sufficiently clear, it is not
delegating improperly. If Congress’s guidelines are too vague or undefined, it is (in essence) giving away
its constitutional power to some other group, and this it cannot do.
Why Regulate the Economy at All?
The market often does not work properly, as economists often note. Monopolies, for example, happen in
the natural course of human events but are not always desirable. To fix this, well-conceived and
objectively enforced competition law (what is called antitrust law in the United States) is needed.
Negative externalities must be “fixed,” as well. For example, as we see in tort law (Chapter 7 "Introduction
to Tort Law"), people and business organizations often do things that impose costs (damages) on others, 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
196
and the legal system will try—through the award of compensatory damages—to make fair adjustments. In
terms of the ideal conditions for a free market, think of tort law as the legal system’s attempt to
compensate for negative externalities: those costs imposed on people who have not voluntarily consented
to bear those costs.
In terms of freedoms to enter or leave the market, the US constitutional guarantees of equal protection
can prevent local, state, and federal governments from imposing discriminatory rules for commerce that
would keep minorities, women, and gay people from full participation in business. For example, if the
small town of Xenophobia, Colorado, passed a law that required all business owners and their employees
to be Christian, heterosexual, and married, the equal protection clause (as well as numerous state and
federal equal opportunity employment laws) would empower plaintiffs to go to court and have the law
struck down as unconstitutional.
Knowing that information is power, we will see many laws administered by regulatory agencies that seek
to level the playing field of economic competition by requiring disclosure of the most pertinent
information for consumers (consumer protection laws), investors (securities laws), and citizens (e.g., the
toxics release inventory laws in environmental law).
Ideal Conditions for a Free Market
1. There are many buyers and many sellers, and none of them has a substantial share of the market.
2. All buyers and sellers in the market are free to enter the market or leave it.
3. All buyers and all sellers have full and perfect knowledge of what other buyers and sellers are up to,
including knowledge of prices, quantity, and quality of all goods being bought or sold.
4. The goods being sold in the market are similar enough to each other that participants do not have
strong preferences as to which seller or buyer they deal with.
5. The costs and benefits of making or using the goods that are exchanged in the market are borne only
by those who buy or sell those goods and not by third parties or people “external” to the market
transaction. (That is, there are no “externalities.”)
6. All buyers and sellers are utility maximizes; each participant in the market tries to get as much as
possible for as little as possible.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
197
7. There are no parties, institutions, or governmental units regulating the price, quantity, or quality of
any of the goods being bought and sold in the market.
In short, some forms of legislation and regulation are needed to counter a tendency toward consolidation
of economic power and discriminatory attitudes toward certain individuals and groups and to insist that
people and companies clean up their own messes and not hide information that would empower voluntary
choices in the free market.
But there are additional reasons to regulate. For example, in economic systems, it is likely for natural
monopolies to occur. These are where one firm can most efficiently supply all of the good or service.
Having duplicate (or triplicate) systems for supplying electricity, for example, would be inefficient, so
most states have a public utilities commission to determine both price and quality of service. This is direct
regulation.
Sometimes destructive competition can result if there is no regulation. Banking and insurance are good
examples of this. Without government regulation of banks (setting standards and methods), open and
fierce competition would result in widespread bank failures. That would erode public confidence in banks
and business generally. The current situation (circa 2011) of six major banks that are “too big to fail” is,
however, an example of destructive noncompetition.
Other market imperfections can yield a demand for regulation. For example, there is a need to regulate
frequencies for public broadcast on radio, television, and other wireless transmissions (for police, fire,
national defense, etc.). Many economists would also list an adequate supply of public goods as something
that must be created by government. On its own, for example, the market would not provide public goods
such as education, a highway system, lighthouses, a military for defense.
True laissez-faire capitalism—a market free from any regulation—would not try to deal with market
imperfections and would also allow people to freely choose products, services, and other arrangements
that historically have been deemed socially unacceptable. These would include making enforceable
contracts for the sale and purchase of persons (slavery), sexual services, “street drugs” such as heroin or
crack cocaine, votes for public office, and grades for this course in business law, and even marriage
partnership.
Thus the free market in actual terms—and not in theory—consists of commerce legally constrained by
what is economically desirable and by what is socially desirable as well. Public policy objectives in the 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
198
social arena include ensuring equal opportunity in employment, protecting employees from unhealthy or
unsafe work environments, preserving environmental quality and resources, and protecting consumers
from unsafe products. Sometimes these objectives are met by giving individuals statutory rights that can
be used in bringing a complaint (e.g., Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, for employment
discrimination), and sometimes they are met by creating agencies with the right to investigate and
monitor and enforce statutory law and regulations created to enforce such law (e.g., the Environmental
Protection Agency, for bringing a lawsuit against a polluting company).
History of Federal Agencies
Through the commerce clause in the US Constitution, Congress has the power to regulate trade between
the states and with foreign nations. The earliest federal agency therefore dealt with trucking and railroads,
to literally set the rules of the road for interstate commerce. The first federal agency, the Interstate
Commerce Commission (ICC), was created in 1887. Congress delegated to the ICC the power to enforce
federal laws against railroad rate discrimination and other unfair pricing practices. By the early part of
this century, the ICC gained the power to fix rates. From the 1970s through 1995, however, Congress
passed deregulatory measures, and the ICC was formally abolished in 1995, with its powers transferred to
the Surface Transportation Board.
Beginning with the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) in 1914, Congress has created numerous other
agencies, many of them familiar actors in American government. Today more than eighty-five federal
agencies have jurisdiction to regulate some form of private activity. Most were created since 1930, and
more than a third since 1960. A similar growth has occurred at the state level. Most states now have
dozens of regulatory agencies, many of them overlapping in function with the federal bodies.
Classification of Agencies
Independent agencies are different from federal executive departments and other executive agencies by
their structural and functional characteristics. Most executive departments have a single director,
administrator, or secretary appointed by the president of the United States. Independent agencies almost
always have a commission or board consisting of five to seven members who share power over the agency.
The president appoints the commissioners or board subject to Senate confirmation, but they often serve 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
199
with staggered terms and often for longer terms than a usual four-year presidential term. They cannot be
removed except for “good cause.” This means that most presidents will not get to appoint all the
commissioners of a given independent agency. Most independent agencies have a statutory requirement
of bipartisan membership on the commission, so the president cannot simply fill vacancies with members
of his own political party.
In addition to the ICC and the FTC, the major independent agencies are the Federal Communications
Commission (1934), Securities and Exchange Commission (1934), National Labor Relations Board (1935),
and Environmental Protection Agency (1970). See Note 5.4 "Ideal Conditions for a Free Market" in the
sidebar.
By contrast, members of executive branch agencies serve at the pleasure of the president and are therefore
far more amenable to political control. One consequence of this distinction is that the rules that
independent agencies promulgate may not be reviewed by the president or his staff—only Congress may
directly overrule them—whereas the White House or officials in the various cabinet departments may
oversee the work of the agencies contained within them (unless specifically denied the power by
Congress).
Powers of Agencies
Agencies have a variety of powers. Many of the original statutes that created them, like the Federal
Communications Act, gave them licensing power. No party can enter into the productive activity covered
by the act without prior license from the agency—for example; no utility can start up a nuclear power
plant unless first approved by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. In recent years, the move toward
deregulation of the economy has led to diminution of some licensing power. Many agencies also have the
authority to set the rates charged by companies subject to the agency’s jurisdiction. Finally, the agencies
can regulate business practices. The FTC has general jurisdiction over all business in interstate commerce
to monitor and root out “unfair acts” and “deceptive practices.” The Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC) oversees the issuance of corporate securities and other investments and monitors the practices of
the stock exchanges.
Unlike courts, administrative agencies are charged with the responsibility of carrying out a specific
assignment or reaching a goal or set of goals. They are not to remain neutral on the various issues of the 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
200
day; they must act. They have been given legislative powers because in a society growing ever more
complex, Congress does not know how to legislate with the kind of detail that is necessary, nor would it
have the time to approach all the sectors of society even if it tried. Precisely because they are to do what
general legislative bodies cannot do, agencies are specialized bodies. Through years of experience in
dealing with similar problems they accumulate a body of knowledge that they can apply to accomplish
their statutory duties.
All administrative agencies have two different sorts of personnel. The heads, whether a single
administrator or a collegial body of commissioners, are political appointees and serve for relatively
limited terms. Below them is a more or less permanent staff—the bureaucracy. Much policy making
occurs at the staff level, because these employees are in essential control of gathering facts and presenting
data and argument to the commissioners, who wield the ultimate power of the agencies.
The Constitution and Agencies
Congress can establish an agency through legislation. When Congress gives powers to an agency, the
legislation is known as an enabling act. The concept that Congress can delegate power to an agency is
known as the delegation doctrine. Usually, the agency will have all three kinds of power: executive,
legislative, and judicial. (That is, the agency can set the rules that business must comply with, can
investigate and prosecute those businesses, and can hold administrative hearings for violations of those
rules. They are, in effect, rule maker, prosecutor, and judge.) Because agencies have all three types of
governmental powers, important constitutional questions were asked when Congress first created them.
The most important question was whether Congress was giving away its legislative power. Was the
separation of powers violated if agencies had power to make rules that were equivalent to legislative
statutes?
In 1935, in Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States, the Supreme Court overturned the National
Industrial Recovery Act on the ground that the congressional delegation of power was too broad. [1] Under
the law, industry trade groups were granted the authority to devise a code of fair competition for the
entire industry, and these codes became law if approved by the president. No administrative body was
created to scrutinize the arguments for a particular code, to develop evidence, or to test one version of a
code against another. Thus it was unconstitutional for the Congress to transfer all of its legislative powers 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
201
to an agency. In later decisions, it was made clear that Congress could delegate some of its legislative
powers, but only if the delegation of authority was not overly broad.
Still, some congressional enabling acts are very broad, such as the enabling legislation for the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), which is given the authority to make rules to
provide for safe and healthful working conditions in US workplaces. Such a broad initiative power gives
OSHA considerable discretion. But, as noted in Section 5.2 "Controlling Administrative Agencies", there
are both executive and judicial controls over administrative agency activities, as well as ongoing control by
Congress through funding and the continuing oversight of agencies, both in hearings and through
subsequent statutory amendments.
KEY TAKEAWAY
Congress creates administrative agencies through enabling acts. In these acts, Congress must delegate
authority by giving the agency some direction as to what it wants the agency to do. Agencies are
usually given broad powers to investigate, set standards (promulgating regulations), and enforce those
standards. Most agencies are executive branch agencies, but some are independent.
EXERCISES
1. Explain why Congress needs to delegate rule-making authority to a specialized agency.
2. Explain why there is any need for interference in the market by means of laws or regulations.
[1] Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States, 295 US 495 (1935).
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
202
5.2 Controlling Administrative Agencies
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Understand how the president controls administrative agencies.
2. Understand how Congress controls administrative agencies.
3. Understand how the courts can control administrative agencies.
During the course of the past seventy years, a substantial debate has been conducted, often in shrill terms,
about the legitimacy of administrative lawmaking. One criticism is that agencies are “captured” by the
industry they are directed to regulate. Another is that they overregulate, stifling individual initiative and
the ability to compete. During the 1960s and 1970s, a massive outpouring of federal law created many new
agencies and greatly strengthened the hands of existing ones. In the late 1970s during the Carter
administration, Congress began to deregulate American society, and deregulation increased under the
Reagan administration. But the accounting frauds of WorldCom, Enron, and others led to the SarbanesOxley Act of 2002, and the financial meltdown of 2008 has led to reregulation of the financial sector. It
remains to be seen whether the Deep water Horizon oil blowout of 2010 will lead to more environmental
regulations or a rethinking on how to make agencies more effective regulators.
Administrative agencies are the focal point of controversy because they are policy-making bodies;
incorporating facets of legislative, executive, and judicial power in a hybrid form that fits uneasily at best
in the framework of American government (see Figure 5.1 "Major Administrative Agencies of the United
States"). They are necessarily at the center of tugging and hauling by the legislature, the executive branch,
and the judiciary, each of which has different means of exercising political control over them. In early
1990, for example, the Bush administration approved a Food and Drug Administration regulation that
limited disease-prevention claims by food packagers, reversing a position by the Reagan administration in
1987 permitting such claims.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
203
Figure 5.1 Major Administrative Agencies of the United States
Legislative Control
Congress can always pass a law repealing a regulation that an agency promulgates. Because this is a timeconsuming process that runs counter to the reason for creating administrative bodies, it happens rarely.
Another approach to controlling agencies is to reduce or threaten to reduce their appropriations. By
retaining ultimate control of the purse strings, Congress can exercise considerable informal control over
regulatory policy.
Executive Control
The president (or a governor, for state agencies) can exercise considerable control over agencies that are
part of his cabinet departments and that are not statutorily defined as independent. Federal agencies,
moreover, are subject to the fiscal scrutiny of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), subject to the
direct control of the president. Agencies are not permitted to go directly to Congress for increases in
budget; these requests must be submitted through the OMB, giving the president indirect leverage over
the continuation of administrators’ programs and policies.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
204
Judicial Review of Agency Actions
Administrative agencies are creatures of law and like everyone else must obey the law. The courts have
jurisdiction to hear claims that the agencies have overstepped their legal authority or have acted in some
unlawful manner.
Courts are unlikely to overturn administrative actions, believing in general that the agencies are better
situated to judge their own jurisdiction and are experts in rulemaking for those matters delegated to them
by Congress. Some agency activities are not reviewable, for a number of reasons. However, after a
business (or some other interested party) has exhausted all administrative remedies, it may seek judicial
review of a final agency decision. The reviewing court is often asked to strike down or modify agency
actions on several possible bases (see Section 5.5.2 "Strategies for Obtaining Judicial Review" on
“Strategies for Obtaining Judicial Review”).
KEY TAKEAWAY
Administrative agencies are given unusual powers: to legislate, investigate, and adjudicate. But these
powers are limited by executive and legislative controls and by judicial review.
EXERCISES
1. Find the website of the Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC). Identify from that site a product
that has been banned by the CPSC for sale in the United States. What reasons were given for its
exclusion from the US market?
2. What has Congress told the CPSC to do in its enabling act? Is this a clear enough mandate to guide the
agency? What could Congress do if the CPSC does something that may be outside of the scope of its
powers? What can an affected business do?
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
205
5.3 The Administrative Procedure Act
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Understand why the Administrative Procedure Act was needed.
2. Understand how hearings are conducted under the act.
3. Understand how the act affects rulemaking by agencies.
In 1946, Congress enacted the Administrative Procedure Act (APA). This fundamental statute detailed for
all federal administrative agencies how they must function when they are deciding cases or issuing
regulations, the two basic tasks of administration. At the state level, the Model State Administrative
Procedure Act, issued in 1946 and revised in 1961, has been adopted in twenty-eight states and the District
of Columbia; three states have adopted the 1981 revision. The other states have statutes that resemble the
model state act to some degree.
Trial-Type Hearings
Deciding cases is a major task of many agencies. For example, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) is
empowered to charge a company with having violated the Federal Trade Commission Act. Perhaps a seller
is accused of making deceptive claims in its advertising. Proceeding in a manner similar to a court, staff
counsel will prepare a case against the company, which can defend itself through its lawyers. The case is
tried before an administrative law judge (ALJ), formerly known as an administrative hearing examiner.
The change in nomenclature was made in 1972 to enhance the prestige of ALJs and more accurately
reflect their duties. Although not appointed for life as federal judges are, the ALJ must be free of
assignments inconsistent with the judicial function and is not subject to supervision by anyone in the
agency who carries on an investigative or prosecutorial function.
The accused parties are entitled to receive notice of the issues to be raised, to present evidence, to argue,
to cross-examine, and to appear with their lawyers. Ex parte (eks PAR-tay) communications—contacts
between the ALJ and outsiders or one party when both parties are not present—are prohibited. However,
the usual burden-of-proof standard followed in a civil proceeding in court does not apply: the ALJ is not 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
206
bound to decide in favor of that party producing the more persuasive evidence. The rule in most
administrative proceedings is “substantial evidence,” evidence that is not flimsy or weak, but is not
necessarily overwhelming evidence, either. The ALJ in most cases will write an opinion. That opinion is
not the decision of the agency, which can be made only by the commissioners or agency head. In effect,
the ALJ’s opinion is appealed to the commission itself.
Certain types of agency actions that have a direct impact on individuals need not be filtered through a fullscale hearing. Safety and quality inspections (grading of food, inspection of airplanes) can be made on the
spot by skilled inspectors. Certain licenses can be administered through tests without a hearing (a test for
a driver’s license), and some decisions can be made by election of those affected (labor union elections).
Rulemaking
Trial-type hearings generally impose on particular parties liabilities based on past or present facts.
Because these cases will serve as precedents, they are a partial guide to future conduct by others. But they
do not directly apply to nonparties, who may argue in a subsequent case that their conduct does not fit
within the holding announced in the case. Agencies can affect future conduct far more directly by
announcing rules that apply to all who come within the agency’s jurisdiction.
The acts creating most of the major federal agencies expressly grant them authority to engage in
rulemaking. This means, in essence, authority to legislate. The outpouring of federal regulations has been
immense. The APA directs agencies about to engage in rulemaking to give notice in
the <em class="emphasis">Federal Register</em class="emphasis">of their intent to do so. The Federal
Register is published daily, Monday through Friday, in Washington, DC, and contains notice of various
actions, including announcements of proposed rulemaking and regulations as adopted. The notice must
specify the time, place, and nature of the rulemaking and offer a description of the proposed rule or the
issues involved. Any interested person or organization is entitled to participate by submitting written
“data, views or arguments.” Agencies are not legally required to air debate over proposed rules, though
they often do so.
The procedure just described is known as “informal” rulemaking. A different procedure is required for
“formal” rulemaking, defined as those instances in which the enabling legislation directs an agency to 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
207
make rules “on the record after opportunity for an agency hearing.” When engaging in formal rulemaking,
agencies must hold an adversary hearing.
Administrative regulations are not legally binding unless they are published. Agencies must publish in
the Federal Register the text of final regulations, which ordinarily do not become effective until thirty
days later. Every year the annual output of regulations is collected and reprinted in
the<em class="emphasis">Code of Federal Regulations (CFR)</em class="emphasis">, a multivolume
paperback series containing all federal rules and regulations keyed to the fifty titles of the US Code (the
compilation of all federal statutes enacted by Congress and grouped according to subject).
KEY TAKEAWAY
Agencies make rules that have the same effect as laws passed by Congress and the president. But such
rules (regulations) must allow for full participation by interested parties. The Administrative Procedure
Act (APA) governs both rulemaking and the agency enforcement of regulations, and it provides a
process for fair hearings.
EXERCISES
1. Go to http://www.regulations.gov/search/Regs/home.html#home. Browse the site. Find a topic that
interests you, and then find a proposed regulation. Notice how comments on the proposed rule are
invited.
2. Why would there be a trial by an administrative agency? Describe the process.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
208
5.4 Administrative Burdens on Business Operations
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Describe the paperwork burden imposed by administrative agencies.
2. Explain why agencies have the power of investigation, and what limits there are to that power.
3. Explain the need for the Freedom of Information Act and how it works in the US legal system.
The Paperwork Burden
The administrative process is not frictionless. The interplay between government agency and private
enterprise can burden business operations in a number of ways. Several of these are noted in this section.
Deciding whether and how to act are not decisions that government agencies reach out of the blue. They
rely heavily on information garnered from business itself. Dozens of federal agencies require corporations
to keep hundreds of types of records and to file numerous periodic reports. The Commission on Federal
Paperwork, established during the Ford administration to consider ways of reducing the paperwork
burden, estimated in its final report in 1977 that the total annual cost of federal paperwork amounted to
$50 billion and that the 10,000 largest business enterprises spent $10 billion annually on paperwork
alone. The paperwork involved in licensing a single nuclear power plant, the commission said, costs
upward of $15 million.
Not surprisingly, therefore, businesses have sought ways of avoiding requests for data. Since the 1940s,
the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has collected economic data on corporate performance from
individual companies for statistical purposes. As long as each company engages in a single line of
business, data are comparable. When the era of conglomerates began in the 1970s, with widely divergent
types of businesses brought together under the roof of a single corporate parent, the data became useless
for purposes of examining the competitive behavior of different industries. So the FTC ordered dozens of
large companies to break out their economic information according to each line of business that they
carried on. The companies resisted, but the US Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
209
where much of the litigation over federal administrative action is decided, directed the companies to
comply with the commission’s order, holding that the Federal Trade Commission Act clearly permits the
agency to collect information for investigatory purposes. [1]
In 1980, responding to cries that businesses, individuals, and state and local governments were being
swamped by federal demands for paperwork, Congress enacted the Paperwork Reduction Act. It gives
power to the federal Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to develop uniform policies for
coordinating the gathering, storage, and transmission of all the millions of reports flowing in each year to
the scores of federal departments and agencies requesting information. These reports include tax and
Medicare forms, financial loan and job applications, questionnaires of all sorts, compliance reports, and
tax and business records. The OMB was given the power also to determine whether new kinds of
information are needed. In effect, any agency that wants to collect new information from outside must
obtain the OMB’s approval.
Inspections
No one likes surprise inspections. A section of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 empowers
agents of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) to search work areas for safety
hazards and for violations of OSHA regulations. The act does not specify whether inspectors are required
to obtain search warrants, required under the Fourth Amendment in criminal cases. For many years, the
government insisted that surprise inspections are not unreasonable and that the time required to obtain a
warrant would defeat the surprise element. The Supreme Court finally ruled squarely on the issue in 1978.
In Marshall v. Barlow’s, Inc., the court held that no less than private individuals, businesses are entitled
to refuse police demands to search the premises unless a court has issued a search warrant. [2]
But where a certain type of business is closely regulated, surprise inspections are the norm, and no
warrant is required. For example, businesses with liquor licenses that might sell to minors are subject to
both overt and covert inspections (e.g., an undercover officer may “search” a liquor store by sending an
underage patron to the store). Or a junkyard that specializes in automobiles and automobile parts may
also be subject to surprise inspections, on the rationale that junkyards are highly likely to be active in the
resale of stolen autos or stolen auto parts. [3]
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
210
It is also possible for inspections to take place without a search warrant and without the permission of the
business. For example, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) wished to inspect parts of the Dow
Chemical facility in Midland, Michigan, without the benefit of warrant. When they were refused, agents of
the EPA obtained a fairly advanced aerial mapping camera and rented an airplane to fly over the Dow
facility. Dow went to court for a restraining order against the EPA and a request to have the EPA turn over
all photographs taken. But the Supreme Court ruled that the areas photographed were “open fields” and
not subject to the protections of the Fourth Amendment. [4]
Access to Business Information in Government Files
In 1966, Congress enacted the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), opening up to the citizenry many of
the files of the government. (The act was amended in 1974 and again in 1976 to overcome a tendency of
many agencies to stall or refuse access to their files.) Under the FOIA, any person has a legally enforceable
right of access to all government documents, with nine specific exceptions, such as classified military
intelligence, medical files, and trade secrets and commercial or financial information if “obtained from a
person and privileged or confidential.” Without the trade-secret and financial-information exemptions,
business competitors could, merely by requesting it, obtain highly sensitive competitive information
sitting in government files.
A federal agency is required under the FOIA to respond to a document request within ten days. But in
practice, months or even years may pass before the government actually responds to an FOIA request.
Requesters must also pay the cost of locating and copying the records. Moreover, not all documents are
available for public inspection. Along with the trade-secret and financial-information exemptions, the
FOIA specifically exempts the following:
• records required by executive order of the president to be kept secret in the interest of national
defense or public policy
• records related solely to the internal personnel rules and practice of an agency
• records exempted from disclosure by another statute
• interagency memos or decisions reflecting the deliberative process
• personnel files and other files that if disclosed, would constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal
privacy
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
211
• information compiled for law enforcement purposes
• geological information concerning wells
Note that the government may provide such information but is not required to provide such information;
it retains discretion to provide information or not.
Regulated companies are often required to submit confidential information to the government. For these
companies, submitting such information presents a danger under the FOIA of disclosure to competitors.
To protect information from disclosure, the company is well advised to mark each document as privileged
and confidential so that government officials reviewing it for a FOIA request will not automatically
disclose it. Most agencies notify a company whose data they are about to disclose. But these practices are
not legally required under the FOIA.
KEY TAKEAWAY
Government agencies, in order to do their jobs, collect a great deal of information from businesses.
This can range from routine paperwork (often burdensome) to inspections, those with warrants and
those without. Surprise inspections are allowed for closely regulated industries but are subject to
Fourth Amendment requirements in general. Some information collected by agencies can be accessed
using the Freedom of Information Act.
EXERCISES
1. Give two examples of a closely regulated industry. Explain why some warrantless searches would be
allowed.
2. Find out why FOIA requests often take months or years to accomplish.
[1] In re FTC Line of Business Report Litigation, 595 F.2d 685 (D.C. Cir. 1978).
[2] Marshall v. Barlow’s, Inc., 436 US 307 (1978).
[3] New York v. Burger, 482 US 691 (1987).
[4] Dow Chemical Co. v. United States Environmental Protection Agency, 476 US 227 (1986).
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
212
5.5 The Scope of Judicial Review
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Describe the “exhaustion of remedies” requirement.
2. Detail various strategies for obtaining judicial review of agency rules.
3. Explain under what circumstances it is possible to sue the government.
Neither an administrative agency’s adjudication nor its issuance of a regulation is necessarily final. Most
federal agency decisions are appealable to the federal circuit courts. To get to court, the appellant must
overcome numerous complex hurdles. He or she must have standing—that is, be in some sense directly
affected by the decision or regulation. The case must be ripe for review; administrative remedies such as
further appeal within the agency must have been exhausted.
Exhaustion of Administrative Remedies
Before you can complain to court about an agency’s action, you must first try to get the agency to
reconsider its action. Generally, you must have asked for a hearing at the hearing examiner level, there
must have been a decision reached that was unfavorable to you, and you must have appealed the decision
to the full board. The full board must rule against you, and only then will you be heard by a court. The
broadest exception to this exhaustion of administrative remedies requirement is if the agency had no
authority to issue the rule or regulation in the first place, if exhaustion of remedies would be impractical
or futile, or if great harm would happen should the rule or regulation continue to apply. Also, if the agency
is not acting in good faith, the courts will hear an appeal without exhaustion.
Strategies for Obtaining Judicial Review
Once these obstacles are cleared, the court may look at one of a series of claims. The appellant might
assert that the agency’s action was ultra vires (UL-truh VI-reez)—beyond the scope of its authority as set
down in the statute. This attack is rarely successful. A somewhat more successful claim is that the agency
did not abide by its own procedures or those imposed upon it by the Administrative Procedure Act.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
213
In formal rulemaking, the appellant also might insist that the agency lacked substantial evidence for the
determination that it made. If there is virtually no evidence to support the agency’s findings, the court
may reverse. But findings of fact are not often overturned by the courts.
Likewise, there has long been a presumption that when an agency issues a regulation, it has the authority
to do so: those opposing the regulation must bear a heavy burden in court to upset it. This is not a
surprising rule, for otherwise courts, not administrators, would be the authors of regulations.
Nevertheless, regulations cannot exceed the scope of the authority conferred by Congress on the agency.
In an important 1981 case before the Supreme Court, the issue was whether the secretary of labor, acting
through the Occupational Health and Safety Administration (OSHA), could lawfully issue a standard
limiting exposure to cotton dust in the workplace without first undertaking a cost-benefit analysis. A
dozen cotton textile manufacturers and the American Textile Manufacturers Institute, representing 175
companies, asserted that the cotton dust standard was unlawful because it did not rationally relate the
benefits to be derived from the standard to the costs that the standard would impose. See Section 5.6
"Cases", American Textile Manufacturers Institute v. Donovan.
In summary, then, an individual or a company may (after exhaustion of administrative remedies)
challenge agency action where such action is the following:
• not in accordance with the agency’s scope of authority
• not in accordance with the US Constitution or the Administrative Procedure Act
• not in accordance with the substantial evidence test
• unwarranted by the facts
• arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accord with the law
Section 706 of the Administrative Procedure Act sets out those standards. While it is difficult to show that
an agency’s action is arbitrary and capricious, there are cases that have so held. For example, after the
Reagan administration set aside a Carter administration rule from the National Highway Traffic and
Safety Administration on passive restraints in automobiles, State Farm and other insurance companies
challenged the reversal as arbitrary and capricious. Examining the record, the Supreme Court found that
the agency had failed to state enough reasons for its reversal and required the agency to review the record
and the rule and provide adequate reasons for its reversal. State Farm and other insurance companies 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
214
thus gained a legal benefit by keeping an agency rule that placed costs on automakers for increased
passenger safety and potentially reducing the number of injury claims from those it had insured. [1]
Suing the Government
In the modern administrative state, the range of government activity is immense, and administrative
agencies frequently get in the way of business enterprise. Often, bureaucratic involvement is wholly
legitimate, compelled by law; sometimes, however, agencies or government officials may overstep their
bounds, in a fit of zeal or spite. What recourse does the private individual or company have?
Mainly for historical reasons, it has always been more difficult to sue the government than to sue private
individuals or corporations. For one thing, the government has long had recourse to the doctrine of
sovereign immunity as a shield against lawsuits. Yet in 1976, Congress amended the Administrative
Procedure Act to waive any federal claim to sovereign immunity in cases of injunctive or other
nonmonetary relief. Earlier, in 1946, in the Federal Tort Claims Act, Congress had waived sovereign
immunity of the federal government for most tort claims for money damages, although the act contains
several exceptions for specific agencies (e.g., one cannot sue for injuries resulting from fiscal operations of
the Treasury Department or for injuries stemming from activities of the military in wartime). The act also
contains a major exception for claims “based upon [an official’s] exercise or performance or the failure to
exercise or perform a discretionary function or duty.” This exception prevents suits against parole boards
for paroling dangerous criminals who then kill or maim in the course of another crime and suits against
officials whose decision to ship explosive materials by public carrier leads to mass deaths and injuries
following an explosion en route. [2]
In recent years, the Supreme Court has been stripping away the traditional immunity enjoyed by many
government officials against personal suits. Some government employees—judges, prosecutors,
legislators, and the president, for example—have absolute immunity against suit for official actions. But
many public administrators and government employees have at best a qualified immunity. Under a
provision of the Civil Rights Act of 1871 (so-called Section 1983 actions), state officials can be sued in
federal court for money damages whenever “under color of any state law” they deprive anyone of his
rights under the Constitution or federal law. In Bivens v. Six Unknown Federal Narcotics Agents, the
Supreme Court held that federal agents may be sued for violating the plaintiff’s Fourth Amendment rights 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
215
against an unlawful search of his home. [3]Subsequent cases have followed this logic to permit suits for
violations of other constitutional provisions. This area of the law is in a state of flux, and it is likely to
continue to evolve.
Sometimes damage is done to an individual or business because the government has given out erroneous
information. For example, suppose that Charles, a bewildered, disabled navy employee, is receiving a
federal disability annuity. Under the regulations, he would lose his pension if he took a job that paid him
in each of two succeeding years more than 80 percent of what he earned in his old navy job. A few years
later, Congress changed the law, making him ineligible if he earned more than 80 percent in anyone year.
For many years, Charles earned considerably less than the ceiling amount. But then one year he got the
opportunity to make some extra money. Not wishing to lose his pension, he called an employee relations
specialist in the US Navy and asked how much he could earn and still keep his pension. The specialist
gave him erroneous information over the telephone and then sent him an out-of-date form that said
Charles could safely take on the extra work. Unfortunately, as it turned out, Charles did exceed the salary
limit, and so the government cut off his pension during the time he earned too much. Charles sues to
recover his lost pension. He argues that he relied to his detriment on false information supplied by the
navy and that in fairness the government should be estopped from denying his claim.
Unfortunately for Charles, he will lose his case. In Office of Personnel Management v. Richmond, the
Supreme Court reasoned that it would be unconstitutional to permit recovery. [4] The appropriations
clause of Article I says that federal money can be paid out only through an appropriation made by law.
The law prevented this particular payment to be made. If the court were to make an exception, it would
permit executive officials in effect to make binding payments, even though unauthorized, simply by
misrepresenting the facts. The harsh reality, therefore, is that mistakes of the government are generally
held against the individual, not the government, unless the law specifically provides for recompense (as,
for example, in the Federal Tort Claims Act just discussed).
KEY TAKEAWAY
After exhausting administrative remedies, there are numerous grounds for seeking judicial review of an
agency’s order or of a final rule. While courts defer to agencies to some degree, an agency must follow
its own rules, comply with the Administrative Procedure Act, act within the scope of its delegated 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
216
authority, avoid acting in an arbitrary manner, and make final rules that are supported by substantial
evidence.
EXERCISES
1. Why would US courts require that someone seeking judicial review of an agency order first exhaust
administrative remedies?
2. On the Internet, find a case where someone has successfully sued the US government under the
Federal Tort Claims Act. What kind of case was it? Did the government argue sovereign immunity?
Does sovereign immunity even make sense to you?
[1] Motor Vehicle Manufacturers’ Assn. v. State Farm Mutual Ins., 463 US 29 (1983).
[2] Dalehite v. United States, 346 US 15 (1953).
[3] Bivens v. Six Unknown Federal Narcotics Agents, 403 US 388 (1971).
[4] Office of Personnel Management v. Richmond, 110 S. Ct. 2465 (1990).
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
217
5.6 Cases
Marshall v. Barlow’s, Inc.
Marshall v. Barlow’s, Inc.
436 U.S. 307 (U.S. Supreme Court 1978)
MR. JUSTICE WHITE delivered the opinion of the Court.
Section 8(a) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (OSHA or Act) empowers agents of the
Secretary of Labor (Secretary) to search the work area of any employment facility within the Act’s
jurisdiction. The purpose of the search is to inspect for safety hazards and violations of OSHA regulations.
No search warrant or other process is expressly required under the Act.
On the morning of September 11, 1975, an OSHA inspector entered the customer service area of Barlow’s,
Inc., an electrical and plumbing installation business located in Pocatello, Idaho. The president and
general manager, Ferrol G. “Bill” Barlow, was on hand; and the OSHA inspector, after showing his
credentials, informed Mr. Barlow that he wished to conduct a search of the working areas of the business.
Mr. Barlow inquired whether any complaint had been received about his company. The inspector
answered no, but that Barlow’s, Inc., had simply turned up in the agency’s selection process. The inspector
again asked to enter the nonpublic area of the business; Mr. Barlow’s response was to inquire whether the
inspector had a search warrant.
The inspector had none. Thereupon, Mr. Barlow refused the inspector admission to the employee area of
his business. He said he was relying on his rights as guaranteed by the Fourth Amendment of the United
States Constitution.
Three months later, the Secretary petitioned the United States District Court for the District of Idaho to
issue an order compelling Mr. Barlow to admit the inspector. The requested order was issued on
December 30, 1975, and was presented to Mr. Barlow on January 5, 1976. Mr. Barlow again refused
admission, and he sought his own injunctive relief against the warrantless searches asserted permitted by
OSHA.…The Warrant Clause of the Fourth Amendment protects commercial buildings as well as private
homes. To hold otherwise would belie the origin of that Amendment, and the American colonial
experience.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
218
An important forerunner of the first 10 Amendments to the United States Constitution, the Virginia Bill of
Rights, specifically opposed “general warrants, whereby an officer or messenger may be commanded to
search suspected places without evidence of a fact committed.” The general warrant was a recurring point
of contention in the Colonies immediately preceding the Revolution. The particular offensiveness it
engendered was acutely felt by the merchants and businessmen whose premises and products were
inspected for compliance with the several parliamentary revenue measures that most irritated the
colonists.…
* * *
This Court has already held that warrantless searches are generally unreasonable, and that this rule
applies to commercial premises as well as homes. In Camara v. Municipal Court, we held:
[E]xcept in certain carefully defined classes of cases, a search of private property without
proper consent is ‘unreasonable’ unless it has been authorized by a valid search warrant.
On the same day, we also ruled: As we explained in Camara, a search of private houses is
presumptively unreasonable if conducted without a warrant. The businessman, like the
occupant of a residence, has a constitutional right to go about his business free from
unreasonable official entries upon his private commercial property. The businessman, too, has
that right placed in jeopardy if the decision to enter and inspect for violation of regulatory
laws can be made and enforced by the inspector in the field without official authority
evidenced by a warrant. These same cases also held that the Fourth Amendment prohibition
against unreasonable searches protects against warrantless intrusions during civil as well as
criminal investigations. The reason is found in the “basic purpose of this Amendment…[which]
is to safeguard the privacy and security of individuals against arbitrary invasions by
governmental officials.” If the government intrudes on a person’s property, the privacy
interest suffers whether the government’s motivation is to investigate violations of criminal
laws or breaches of other statutory or regulatory standards.…
[A]n exception from the search warrant requirement has been recognized for “pervasively regulated
business[es],” United States v. Biswell, 406 U.S. 311, 316 (1972), and for “closely regulated” industries
“long subject to close supervision and inspection,” Colonnade Catering Corp. v. United States, 397 U.S.
72, 74, 77 (1970). These cases are indeed exceptions, but they represent responses to relatively unique 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
219
circumstances. Certain industries have such a history of government oversight that no reasonable
expectation of privacy could exist for a proprietor over the stock of such an enterprise. Liquor
(Colonnade) and firearms (Biswell) are industries of this type when an entrepreneur embarks upon such a
business; he has voluntarily chosen to subject himself to a full arsenal of governmental regulation.
* * *
The clear import of our cases is that the closely regulated industry of the type involved
in Colonnade and Biswell is the exception. The Secretary would make it the rule. Invoking the WalshHealey Act of 1936, 41 U.S.C. § 35 et seq., the Secretary attempts to support a conclusion that all
businesses involved in interstate commerce have long been subjected to close supervision of employee
safety and health conditions. But…it is quite unconvincing to argue that the imposition of minimum
wages and maximum hours on employers who contracted with the Government under the Walsh-Healey
Act prepared the entirety of American interstate commerce for regulation of working conditions to the
minutest detail. Nor can any but the most fictional sense of voluntary consent to later searches be found in
the single fact that one conducts a business affecting interstate commerce. Under current practice and
law, few businesses can be conducted without having some effect on interstate commerce.
* * *
The critical fact in this case is that entry over Mr. Barlow’s objection is being sought by a Government
agent. Employees are not being prohibited from reporting OSHA violations. What they observe in their
daily functions is undoubtedly beyond the employer’s reasonable expectation of privacy. The Government
inspector, however, is not an employee. Without a warrant he stands in no better position than a member
of the public. What is observable by the public is observable, without a warrant, by the Government
inspector as well. The owner of a business has not, by the necessary utilization of employees in his
operation, thrown open the areas where employees alone are permitted to the warrantless scrutiny of
Government agents. That an employee is free to report, and the Government is free to use, any evidence of
noncompliance with OSHA that the employee observes furnishes no justification for federal agents to
enter a place of business from which the public is restricted and to conduct their own warrantless search.
* * *
[The District Court judgment is affirmed.]
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
220
CASE QUESTIONS
1. State, as briefly and clearly as possible, the argument that Barlow’s is making in this case.
2. Why would some industries or businesses be “closely regulated”? What are some of those businesses?
3. The Fourth Amendment speaks of “people” being secure in their “persons, houses, papers, and
effects.” Why would the Fourth Amendment apply to a business, which is not in a “house”?
4. If the Fourth Amendment does not distinguish between closely regulated industries and those that are
not, why does the court do so?
American Textile Manufacturers Institute v. Donovan
American Textile Manufacturers Institute v. Donovan
452 U.S. 490 (1981)
JUSTICE BRENNAN delivered the opinion of the Court.
Congress enacted the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (Act) “to assure so far as possible every
working man and woman in the Nation safe and healthful working conditions.…“The Act authorizes the
Secretary of Labor to establish, after notice and opportunity to comment, mandatory nationwide
standards governing health and safety in the workplace. In 1978, the Secretary, acting through the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), promulgated a standard limiting occupational
exposure to cotton dust, an airborne particle byproduct of the preparation and manufacture of cotton
products, exposure to which produces a “constellation of respiratory effects” known as “byssinosis.” This
disease was one of the expressly recognized health hazards that led to passage of the Act.
Petitioners in these consolidated cases representing the interests of the cotton industry, challenged the
validity of the “Cotton Dust Standard” in the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit
pursuant to § 6 (f) of the Act, 29 U.S.C. § 655 (f). They contend in this Court, as they did below, that the
Act requires OSHA to demonstrate that its Standard reflects a reasonable relationship between the costs
and benefits associated with the Standard. Respondents, the Secretary of Labor and two labor
organizations, counter that Congress balanced the costs and benefits in the Act itself, and that the Act
should therefore be construed not to require OSHA to do so. They interpret the Act as mandating that 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
221
OSHA enact the most protective standard possible to eliminate a significant risk of material health
impairment, subject to the constraints of economic and technological feasibility.
The Court of Appeals held that the Act did not require OSHA to compare costs and benefits.
We granted certiorari, 449 U.S. 817 (1980), to resolve this important question, which was presented but
not decided in last Term’s Industrial Union Dept. v. American Petroleum Institute, 448 U.S. 607 (1980),
and to decide other issues related to the Cotton Dust Standard.
* * *
Not until the early 1960’s was byssinosis recognized in the United States as a distinct occupational hazard
associated with cotton mills. In 1966, the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists
(ACGIH), a private organization, recommended that exposure to total cotton dust be limited to a
“threshold limit value” of 1,000 micrograms per cubic meter of air (1,000 g/m3.) averaged over an 8-hour
workday. See 43 Fed. Reg. 27351, col. 1 (1978). The United States Government first regulated exposure to
cotton dust in 1968, when the Secretary of Labor, pursuant to the Walsh-Healey Act, 41 U.S.C. 35 (e),
promulgated airborne contaminant threshold limit values, applicable to public contractors, that included
the 1,000 g/m3 limit for total cotton dust. 34 Fed. Reg. 7953 (1969). Following passage of the Act in 1970,
the 1,000 g/m3. standard was adopted as an “established Federal standard” under 6 (a) of the Act, 84 Stat.
1593, 29 U.S.C. 655 (a), a provision designed to guarantee immediate protection of workers for the period
between enactment of the statute and promulgation of permanent standards.
That same year, the Director of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH),
pursuant to the Act, 29 U.S.C. §§ 669(a)(3), 671 (d)(2), submitted to the Secretary of Labor a
recommendation for a cotton dust standard with a permissible exposure limit (PEL) that “should be set at
the lowest level feasible, but in no case at an environmental concentration as high as 0.2 mg lint-free
cotton dust/cu m,” or 200 g/m3. of lint-free respirable dust. Several months later, OSHA published an
Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, 39 Fed.Reg. 44769 (1974), requesting comments from
interested parties on the NIOSH recommendation and other related matters. Soon thereafter, the Textile
Worker’s Union of America, joined by the North Carolina Public Interest Research Group, petitioned the
Secretary, urging a more stringent PEL of 100 g/m3.
On December 28, 1976, OSHA published a proposal to replace the existing federal standard on cotton dust
with a new permanent standard, pursuant to § 6(b)(5) of the Act, 29 U.S.C. § 655(b)(5). 41 Fed.Reg. 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
222
56498. The proposed standard contained a PEL of 200 g/m3 of vertical elutriated lint-free respirable
cotton dust for all segments of the cotton industry. Ibid. It also suggested an implementation strategy for
achieving the PEL that relied on respirators for the short term and engineering controls for the long-term.
OSHA invited interested parties to submit written comments within a 90-day period.
* * *
The starting point of our analysis is the language of the statute itself. Section 6(b)(5) of the Act, 29 U.S.C.
§ 655(b)(5) (emphasis added), provides:
The Secretary, in promulgating standards dealing with toxic materials or harmful physical
agents under this subsection, shall set the standard which most adequately assures, to the
extent feasible, on the basis of the best available evidence, that no employee will suffer
material impairment of health or functional capacity even if such employee has regular
exposure to the hazard dealt with by such standard for the period of his working life. Although
their interpretations differ, all parties agree that the phrase “to the extent feasible” contains
the critical language in § 6(b)(5) for purposes of these cases.
The plain meaning of the word “feasible” supports respondents’ interpretation of the statute. According to
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary of the English Language 831 (1976), “feasible” means
“capable of being done, executed, or effected.” In accord, the Oxford English Dictionary 116 (1933)
(“Capable of being done, accomplished or carried out”); Funk & Wagnalls New “Standard” Dictionary of
the English Language 903 (1957) (“That may be done, performed or effected”). Thus, § 6(b)(5) directs the
Secretary to issue the standard that “most adequately assures…that no employee will suffer material
impairment of health,” limited only by the extent to which this is “capable of being done.” In effect then,
as the Court of Appeals held, Congress itself defined the basic relationship between costs and benefits, by
placing the “benefit” of worker health above all other considerations save those making attainment of this
“benefit” unachievable. Any standard based on a balancing of costs and benefits by the Secretary that
strikes a different balance than that struck by Congress would be inconsistent with the command set forth
in § 6(b)(5). Thus, cost-benefit analysis by OSHA is not required by the statute because feasibility analysis
is.
When Congress has intended that an agency engage in cost-benefit analysis, it has clearly indicated such
intent on the face of the statute. One early example is the Flood Control Act of 1936, 33 U.S.C. § 701:
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
223
[T]he Federal Government should improve or participate in the improvement of navigable
waters or their tributaries, including watersheds thereof, for flood control purposes if
the benefits to whomsoever they may accrue are in excess of the estimated costs,
and if the lives and social security of people are otherwise adversely affected. (emphasis
added)
A more recent example is the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act Amendments of 1978, providing that
offshore drilling operations shall use the best available and safest technologies which the Secretary
determines to be economically feasible, wherever failure of equipment would have a significant effect on
safety, health, or the environment, except where the Secretary determines that the incremental benefits
are clearly insufficient to justify the incremental costs of using such technologies.
These and other statutes demonstrate that Congress uses specific language when intending that an agency
engage in cost-benefit analysis. Certainly in light of its ordinary meaning, the word “feasible” cannot be
construed to articulate such congressional intent. We therefore reject the argument that Congress
required cost-benefit analysis in § 6(b) (5).
CASE QUESTIONS
1. What is byssinosis? Why should byssinosis be anything that the textile companies are responsible for,
ethically or legally? If it is well-known that textile workers get cotton dust in their systems and develop
brown lung, don’t they nevertheless choose to work there and assume the risk of all injuries?
2. By imposing costs on the textile industry, what will be the net effect on US textile manufacturing jobs?
3. How is byssinosis a “negative externality” that is not paid for by either the manufacturer or the
consumer of textile products? How should the market, to be fair and efficient, adjust for these
negative externalities other than by setting a reasonable standard that shares the burden between
manufacturers and their employees? Should the entire burden be on the manufacturer?
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
224
5.7 Summary and Exercises
Summary
Administrative rules and regulations constitute the largest body of laws that directly affect business.
These regulations are issued by dozens of federal and state agencies that regulate virtually every aspect of
modern business life, including the natural environment, corporate finance, transportation,
telecommunications, energy, labor relations, and trade practices. The administrative agencies derive their
power to promulgate regulations from statutes passed by Congress or state legislatures.
The agencies have a variety of powers. They can license companies to carry on certain activities or prohibit
them from doing so, lay down codes of conduct, set rates that companies may charge for their services,
and supervise various aspects of business.
EXERCISES
1. The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission seeks data about the racial composition of Terrific
Textiles’ labor force. Terrific refuses on the grounds that inadvertent disclosure of the numbers might
cause certain “elements” to picket its factories. The EEOC takes Terrific to court to get the data. What
is the result?
2. In order to police the profession, the state legislature has just passed a law permitting the State
Plumbers’ Association the power to hold hearings to determine whether a particular plumber has
violated the plumbing code of ethics, written by the association. Sam, a plumber, objects to the
convening of a hearing when he is accused by Roger, a fellow plumber, of acting unethically by
soliciting business from Roger’s customers. Sam goes to court, seeking to enjoin the association’s
disciplinary committee from holding the hearing. What is the result? How would you argue Sam’s
case? The association’s case?
3. Assume that the new president of the United States was elected overwhelmingly by pledging in his
campaign to “do away with bureaucrats who interfere in your lives.” The day he takes the oath of
office he determines to carry out his pledge. Discuss which of the following courses he may lawfully
follow: (a) Fire all incumbent commissioners of federal agencies in order to install new appointees. (b) 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
225
Demand that all pending regulations being considered by federal agencies be submitted to the White
House for review and redrafting, if necessary. (c) Interview potential nominees for agency positions to
determine whether their regulatory philosophy is consistent with his.
4. Dewey owned a mine in Wisconsin. He refused to allow Department of Labor agents into the mine to
conduct warrantless searches to determine whether previously found safety violations had been
corrected. The Federal Mine Safety and Health Amendments Act of 1977 authorize four warrantless
inspections per year. Is the provision for warrantless inspections by this agency constitutional? [1]
5. In determining the licensing requirements for nuclear reactors, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission
(NRC) adopted a zero-release assumption: that the permanent storage of certain nuclear waste would
have no significant environmental impact and that potential storage leakages should not be a factor
discussed in the appropriate environmental impact statement (EIS) required before permitting
construction of a nuclear power plant. This assumption is based on the NRC’s belief that technology
would be developed to isolate the wastes from the environment, and it was clear from the record that
the NRC had “digested a massive material and disclosed all substantial risks” and had considered that
the zero-release assumption was uncertain. There was a remote possibility of contamination by water
leakage into the storage facility. An environmental NGO sued, asserting that the NRC had violated the
regulations governing the EIS by arbitrarily and capriciously ignoring the potential contamination. The
court of appeals agreed, and the power plant appealed. Had the NRC acted arbitrarily and
capriciously? [2]
SELF -TEST QUESTIONS
1. Most federal administrative agencies are created by
a. an executive order by the president
b. a Supreme Court decision
c. the passage of enabling legislation by Congress, signed by the president
d. a and c
The Federal Trade Commission, like most administrative agencies of the federal government,
is part of
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
226
a. the executive branch of government
b. the legislative branch of government
c. the judicial branch of government
d. the administrative branch of government
In the Clean Water Act, Congress sets broad guidelines, but it is the Environmental Protection
Agency that proposes rules to regulate industrial discharges. Where do proposed rules
originally appear?
a. in the Congressional record
b. in the Federal Register
c. in the Code of Federal Regulations
d. in the United States code service
The legal basis for all administrative law, including regulations of the Federal Trade
Commission, is found in
a. the Administrative Procedure Act
b. the US Constitution
c. the commerce clause
d. none of the above
The Federal Trade Commission, like other administrative agencies, has the power to
a. issue proposed rules
b. undertake investigations of firms that may have violated FTC regulations
c. prosecute firms that have violated FTC regulations
d. none of the above
e. all of the above
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
227
SELF -TEST ANSWERS
1. c
2. a
3. b
4. b
5. e
[1] Donovan v. Dewey, 452 US 594 (1981).
[2] Baltimore Gas and Electric Co. v. Natural Resources Defense Council Inc., 462 US 87 (1983).
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
228
Chapter 6
Criminal Law
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to do the following:
1. Explain how criminal law differs from civil law.
2. Categorize the various types of crimes and define the most serious felonies.
3. Discuss and question the criminal “intent” of a corporation.
4. Explain basic criminal procedure and the rights of criminal defendants.
At times, unethical behavior by businesspeople can be extreme enough that society will respond by
criminalizing certain kinds of activities. Ponzi schemes, arson, various kinds of fraud, embezzlement,
racketeering, foreign corrupt practices, tax evasion, and insider trading are just a few. A corporation can
face large fines, and corporate managers can face both fines and jail sentences for violating criminal laws.
This chapter aims to explain how criminal law differs from civil law, to discuss various types of crimes,
and to relate the basic principles of criminal procedure.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
229
6.1 The Nature of Criminal Law
Criminal law is the most ancient branch of the law. Many wise observers have tried to define and explain
it, but the explanations often include many complex and subtle distinctions. A traditional criminal law
course would include a lot of discussions on criminal intent, the nature of criminal versus civil
responsibility, and the constitutional rights accorded the accused. But in this chapter, we will consider
only the most basic aspects of intent, responsibility, and constitutional rights.
Unlike civil actions, where plaintiffs seek compensation or other remedies for themselves, crimes involve
“the state” (the federal government, a state government, or some subunit of state government). This is
because crimes involve some “harm to society” and not just harm to certain individuals. But “harm to
society” is not always evident in the act itself. For example, two friends of yours at a party argue, take the
argument outside, and blows are struck; one has a bloody nose and immediately goes home. The crimes of
assault and battery have been committed, even though no one else knows about the fight and the friends
later make up. By contrast, suppose a major corporation publicly announces that it is closing operations in
your community and moving operations to Southeast Asia. There is plenty of harm to society as the plant
closes down and no new jobs take the place of the company’s jobs. Although the effects on society are
greater in the second example, only the first example is a crime.
Crimes are generally defined by legislatures, in statutes; the statutes describe in general terms the nature
of the conduct they wish to criminalize. For government punishment to be fair, citizens must have clear
notice of what is criminally prohibited. Ex post facto laws—laws created “after the fact” to punish an act
that was legal at the time—are expressly prohibited by the US Constitution. Overly vague statutes can also
be struck down by courts under a constitutional doctrine known as “void for vagueness.”
What is considered a crime will also vary from society to society and from time to time. For example,
while cocaine use was legal in the United States at one time, it is now a controlled substance, and
unauthorized use is now a crime. Medical marijuana was not legal fifty years ago when its use began to
become widespread, and in some states its use or possession was a felony. Now, some states make it legal
to use or possess it under some circumstances. In the United States, you can criticize and make jokes
about the president of the United States without committing a crime, but in many countries it is a serious
criminal act to criticize a public official.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
230
Attitudes about appropriate punishment for crimes will also vary considerably from nation to nation.
Uganda has decreed long prison sentences for homosexuals and death to repeat offenders. In Saudi
Arabia, the government has proposed to deliberately paralyze a criminal defendant who criminally
assaulted someone and unintentionally caused the victim’s paralysis. Limits on punishment are set in the
United States through the Constitution’s prohibition on “cruel or unusual punishments.”
It is often said that ignorance of the law is no excuse. But there are far too many criminal laws for anyone
to know them all. Also, because most people do not actually read statutes, the question of “criminal
intent” comes up right away: if you don’t know that the legislature has made driving without a seat belt
fastened a misdemeanor, you cannot have intended to harm society. You might even argue that there is no
harm to anyone but yourself!
The usual answer to this is that the phrase “ignorance of the law is no excuse” means that society (through
its elected representatives) gets to decide what is harmful to society, not you. Still, you may ask, “Isn’t it
my choice whether to take the risk of failing to wear a seat belt? Isn’t this a victimless crime? Where is the
harm to society?” A policymaker or social scientist may answer that your injuries, statistically, are
generally going to be far greater if you don’t wear one and that your choice may actually impose costs on
society. For example, you might not have enough insurance, so that a public hospital will have to take care
of your head injuries, injuries that would likely have been avoided by your use of a seat belt.
But, as just noted, it is hard to know the meaning of some criminal laws. Teenagers hanging around the
sidewalks on Main Street were sometimes arrested for “loitering.” The constitutional void-for-vagueness
doctrine has led the courts to overturn statutes that are not clear. For example, “vagrancy” was long held
to be a crime, but US courts began some forty years ago to overturn vagrancy and “suspicious person”
statutes on the grounds that they are too vague for people to know what they are being asked not to do.
This requirement that criminal statutes not be vague does not mean that the law always defines crimes in
ways that can be easily and clearly understood. Many statutes use terminology developed by the commonlaw courts. For example, a California statute defines murder as “the unlawful killing of a human being,
with malice aforethought.” If no history backed up these words, they would be unconstitutionally vague.
But there is a rich history of judicial decisions that provides meaning for much of the arcane language like
“malice aforethought” strewn about in the statute books.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
231
Because a crime is an act that the legislature has defined as socially harmful, the parties involved cannot
agree among themselves to forget a particular incident, such as a barroom brawl, if the authorities decide
to prosecute. This is one of the critical distinctions between criminal and civil law. An assault is both a
crime and a tort. The person who was assaulted may choose to forgive his assailant and not to sue him for
damages. But he cannot stop the prosecutor from bringing an indictment against the assailant. (However,
because of crowded dockets, a victim that declines to press charges may cause a busy prosecutor to choose
to not to bring an indictment.)
A crime consists of an act defined as criminal—an actus reus—and the requisite “criminal intent.”
Someone who has a burning desire to kill a rival in business or romance and who may actually intend to
murder but does not act on his desire has not committed a crime. He may have a “guilty mind”—the
translation of the Latin phrase mens rea—but he is guilty of no crime. A person who is forced to commit a
crime at gunpoint is not guilty of a crime, because although there was an act defined as criminal—an actus
reus—there was no criminal intent.
KEY TAKEAWAY
Crimes are usually defined by statute and constitute an offense against society. In each case, there must
be both an act and some mens rea (criminal intent).
EXERCISES
1. Other than deterring certain kinds of conduct, what purpose does the criminal law serve?
2. Why is ignorance of the law no excuse? Why shouldn’t it be an excuse, when criminal laws can be
complicated and sometimes ambiguous?
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
232
6.2 Types of Crimes
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Categorize various types of crimes.
2. Name and define the major felonies in criminal law.
3. Explain how white-collar crime differs from other crimes.
4. Define a variety of white-collar crimes.
Most classifications of crime turn on the seriousness of the act. In general, seriousness is defined by the
nature or duration of the punishment set out in the statute. A felony is a crime punishable (usually) by
imprisonment of more than one year or by death. (Crimes punishable by death are sometimes known as
capital crimes; they are increasingly rare in the United States.) The major felonies include murder, rape,
kidnapping, armed robbery, embezzlement, insider trading, fraud, and racketeering. All other crimes are
usually known as misdemeanors, petty offenses, or infractions. Another way of viewing crimes is by the
type of social harm the statute is intended to prevent or deter, such as offenses against the person,
offenses against property, and white-collar crime.
Offenses against the Person
Homicide
Homicide is the killing of one person by another. Not every killing is criminal. When the law permits one
person to kill another—for example, a soldier killing an enemy on the battlefield during war, or a killing in
self-defense—the death is considered the result of justifiable homicide. An excusable homicide, by
contrast, is one in which death results from an accident in which the killer is not at fault.
All other homicides are criminal. The most severely punished form is murder, defined as homicide
committed with “malice aforethought.” This is a term with a very long history. Boiled down to its
essentials, it means that the defendant had the intent to kill. A killing need not be premeditated for any 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
233
long period of time; the premeditation might be quite sudden, as in a bar fight that escalates in that
moment when one of the fighters reaches for a knife with the intent to kill.
Sometimes a homicide can be murder even if there is no intent to kill; intent to inflict great bodily harm
can be murder if the result is the death of another person. A killing that takes place while a felony (such as
armed robbery) is being committed is also murder, whether or not the killer intended any harm. This is
the so-called felony murder rule. Examples are the accidental discharge of a gun that kills an innocent
bystander or the asphyxiation death of a fireman from smoke resulting from a fire set by an arsonist. The
felony murder rule is more significant than it sounds, because it also applies to the accomplices of one
who does the killing. Thus the driver of a getaway car stationed a block away from the scene of the robbery
can be convicted of murder if a gun accidentally fires during the robbery and someone is killed.
Manslaughter is an act of killing that does not amount to murder. Voluntary manslaughter is an
intentional killing, but one carried out in the “sudden heat of passion” as the result of some provocation.
An example is a fight that gets out of hand. Involuntary manslaughter entails a lesser degree of
willfulness; it usually occurs when someone has taken a reckless action that result in death (e.g., a death
resulting from a traffic accident in which one driver recklessly runs a red light).
Assault and Battery
Ordinarily, we would say that a person who has struck another has “assaulted” him. Technically, that is
a battery—the unlawful application of force to another person. The force need not be violent. Indeed, a
man who kisses a woman is guilty of a battery if he does it against her will. The other person may consent
to the force. That is one reason why surgeons require patients to sign consent forms, giving the doctor
permission to operate. In the absence of such consent, an operation is a battery. That is also why football
players are not constantly being charged with battery. Those who agree to play football agree to submit to
the rules of the game, which of course include the right to tackle. But the consent does not apply to all acts
of physical force: a hockey player who hits an opponent over the head with his stick can be prosecuted for
the crime of battery.
Criminal assault is an attempt to commit a battery or the deliberate placing of another in fear of receiving
an immediate battery. If you throw a rock at a friend, but he manages to dodge it, you have committed an
assault. Some states limit an assault to an attempt to commit a battery by one who has a “present ability” 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
234
to do so. Pointing an unloaded gun and threatening to shoot would not be an assault, nor, of course, could
it be a battery. The modem tendency, however, is to define an assault as an attempt to commit a battery by
one with an apparent ability to do so.
Assault and battery may be excused. For example, a bar owner (or her agent, the bouncer) may use
reasonable force to remove an unruly patron. If the use of force is excessive, the bouncer can be found
guilty of assault and battery, and a civil action could arise against the bar owner as well.
Offenses against Property
Theft: Larceny, Robbery, Embezzlement, False Pretenses
The concept of theft is familiar enough. Less familiar is the way the law has treated various aspects of the
act of stealing. Criminal law distinguishes among many different crimes that are popularly known as theft.
Many technical words have entered the language—burglary, larceny, robbery—but are often used
inaccurately. Brief definitions of the more common terms are discussed here.
The basic crime of stealing personal property is larceny. By its old common-law definition, still in use
today, larceny is the wrongful “taking and carrying away of the personal property of another with intent to
steal the same.”
The separate elements of this offense have given rise to all kinds of difficult cases. Take the theft of fruit,
for example, with regard to the essential element of “personal property.” If a man walking through an
orchard plucks a peach from a tree and eats it, he is not guilty of larceny because he has not taken away
personal property (the peach is part of the land, being connected to the tree). But if he picks up a peach
lying on the ground, he is guilty of larceny. Or consider the element of “taking” or “carrying away.”
Sneaking into a movie theater without paying is not an act of larceny (though in most states it is a criminal
act). Taking electricity by tapping into the power lines of an electric utility was something that baffled
judges late in the nineteenth century because it was not clear whether electricity is a “something” that can
be taken. Modern statutes have tended to make clear that electricity can be the object of larceny. Or
consider the element of“intent to steal the same.” If you borrow your friend’s BMW without his
permission in order to go to the grocery store, intending to return it within a few minutes and then do
return it, you have not committed larceny. But if you meet another friend at the store who convinces you
to take a long joyride with the car and you return hours later, you may have committed larceny.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
235
A particular form of larceny is robbery, which is defined as larceny from a person by means of violence or
intimidation.
Larceny involves the taking of property from the possession of another. Suppose that a person legitimately
comes to possess the property of another and wrongfully appropriates it—for example, an automobile
mechanic entrusted with your car refuses to return it, or a bank teller who is entitled to temporary
possession of cash in his drawer takes it home with him. The common law had trouble with such cases
because the thief in these cases already had possession; his crime was in assuming ownership. Today,
such wrongful conversion, known as embezzlement, has been made a statutory offense in all states.
Statutes against larceny and embezzlement did not cover all the gaps in the law. A conceptual problem
arises in the case of one who is tricked into giving up his title to property. In larceny and embezzlement,
the thief gains possession or ownership without any consent of the owner or custodian of the property.
Suppose, however, that an automobile dealer agrees to take his customer’s present car as a trade-in. The
customer says that he has full title to the car. In fact, the customer is still paying off an installment loan
and the finance company has an interest in the old car. If the finance company repossesses the car, the
customer—who got a new car at a discount because of his false representation—cannot be said to have
taken the new car by larceny or embezzlement. Nevertheless, he tricked the dealer into selling, and the
dealer will have lost the value of the repossessed car. Obviously, the customer is guilty of a criminal act;
the statutes outlawing it refer to this trickery as the crime of false pretenses, defined as obtaining
ownership of the property of another by making untrue representations of fact with intent to defraud.
A number of problems have arisen in the judicial interpretation of false-pretense statutes. One concerns
whether the taking is permanent or only temporary. The case of State v. Mills (Section 6.7 "Cases") shows
the subtle questions that can be presented and the dangers inherent in committing “a little fraud.”
In the Mills case, the claim was that a mortgage instrument dealing with one parcel of land was used
instead for another. This is a false representation of fact. Suppose, by contrast, that a person
misrepresents his state of mind: “I will pay you back tomorrow,” he says, knowing full well that he does
not intend to. Can such a misrepresentation amount to false pretenses punishable as a criminal offense?
In most jurisdictions it cannot. A false-pretense violation relates to a past event or existing fact, not to a
statement of intention. If it were otherwise, anyone failing to pay a debt might find himself facing criminal
prosecution, and business would be less prone to take risks.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
236
The problem of proving intent is especially difficult when a person has availed himself of the services of
another without paying. A common example is someone leaving a restaurant without paying for the meal.
In most states, this is specifically defined in the statutes as theft of services.
Receiving Stolen Property
One who engages in receiving stolen property with knowledge that it is stolen is guilty of a felony or
misdemeanor, depending on the value of the property. The receipt need not be personal; if the property is
delivered to a place under the control of the receiver, then he is deemed to have received it. “Knowledge”
is construed broadly: not merely actual knowledge, but (correct) belief and suspicion (strong enough not
to investigate for fear that the property will turn out to have been stolen) are sufficient for conviction.
Forgery
Forgery is false writing of a document of legal significance (or apparent legal significance!) with intent to
defraud. It includes the making up of a false document or the alteration of an existing one. The writing
need not be done by hand but can be by any means—typing, printing, and so forth. Documents commonly
the subject of forgery are negotiable instruments (checks, money orders, and the like), deeds, receipts,
contracts, and bills of lading. The forged instrument must itself be false, not merely contain a falsehood. If
you fake your neighbor’s signature on one of his checks made out to cash, you have committed forgery.
But if you sign a check of your own that is made out to cash, knowing that there is no money in your
checking account, the instrument is not forged, though the act may be criminal if done with the intent to
defraud.
The mere making of a forged instrument is unlawful. So is the “uttering” (or presentation) of such an
instrument, whether or not the one uttering it actually forged it. The usual example of a false signature is
by no means the only way to commit forgery. If done with intent to defraud, the backdating of a
document, the modification of a corporate name or the filling in of lines left blank on a form can all
constitute forgery.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
237
Extortion
Under common law, extortion could only be committed by a government official, who corruptly collected
an unlawful fee under color of office. A common example is a salaried building inspector who refuses to
issue a permit unless the permittee pays him. Under modern statutes, the crime of extortion has been
broadened to include the wrongful collection of money or something else of value by anyone by means of a
threat (short of a threat of immediate physical violence, for such a threat would make the demand an act
of robbery). This kind of extortion is usually called blackmail. The blackmail threat commonly is to expose
some fact of the victim’s private life or to make a false accusation about him.
Offenses against Habitation and Other Offenses
Burglary
Burglary is not a crime against property. It is defined as “the breaking and entering of the dwelling of
another in the nighttime with intent to commit a felony.” The intent to steal is not an issue: a man who
sneaks into a woman’s home intent on raping her has committed a burglary, even if he does not carry out
the act. The student doing critical thinking will no doubt notice that the definition provides plenty of room
for argument. What is “breaking”? (The courts do not require actual destruction; the mere opening of a
closed door, even if unlocked, is enough.) What is entry? When does night begin? What kind of intent?
Whose dwelling? Can a landlord burglarize the dwelling of his tenant? (Yes.) Can a person burglarize his
own home? (No.)
Arson
Under common law, arson was the malicious burning of the dwelling of another. Burning one’s own house
for purposes of collecting insurance was not an act of arson under common law. The statutes today make
it a felony intentionally to set fire to any building, whether or not it is a dwelling and whether or not the
purpose is to collect insurance.
Bribery
Bribery is a corrupt payment (or receipt of such a payment) for official action. The payment can be in cash
or in the form of any goods, intangibles, or services that the recipient would find valuable. Under common 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
238
law, only a public official could be bribed. In most states, bribery charges can result from the bribe of
anyone performing a public function.
Bribing a public official in government procurement (contracting) can result in serious criminal charges.
Bribing a public official in a foreign country to win a contract can result in charges under the Foreign
Corrupt Practices Act.
Perjury
Perjury is the crime of giving a false oath, either orally or in writing; in a judicial or other official
proceeding (lies made in proceedings other than courts are sometimes termed “false swearing”). To be
perjuries, the oath must have been made corruptly—that is, with knowledge that it was false or without
sincere belief that it was true. An innocent mistake is not perjury. A statement, though true, is perjury if
the maker of it believes it to be false. Statements such as “I don’t remember” or “to the best of my
knowledge” are not sufficient to protect a person who is lying from conviction for perjury. To support a
charge of perjury, however, the false statement must be “material,” meaning that the statement is relevant
to whatever the court is trying to find out.
White-Collar Crime
White-collar crime, as distinguished from “street crime,” refers generally to fraud-related acts carried out
in a nonviolent way, usually connected with business. Armed bank robbery is not a white-collar crime, but
embezzlement by a teller or bank officer is. Many white-collar crimes are included within the statutory
definitions of embezzlement and false pretenses. Most are violations of state law. Depending on how they
are carried out, many of these same crimes are also violations of federal law.
Any act of fraud in which the United States postal system is used or which involves interstate phone calls
or Internet connections is a violation of federal law. Likewise, many different acts around the buying and
selling of securities can run afoul of federal securities laws. Other white-collar crimes include tax fraud;
price fixing; violations of food, drug, and environmental laws; corporate bribery of foreign companies;
and—the newest form—computer fraud. Some of these are discussed here; others are covered in later
chapters.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
239
Mail and Wire Fraud
Federal law prohibits the use of the mails or any interstate electronic communications medium for the
purpose of furthering a “scheme or artifice to defraud.” The statute is broad, and it is relatively easy for
prosecutors to prove a violation. The law also bans attempts to defraud, so the prosecutor need not show
that the scheme worked or that anyone suffered any losses. “Fraud” is broadly construed: anyone who
uses the mails or telephone to defraud anyone else of virtually anything, not just of money, can be
convicted under the law. In one case, a state governor was convicted of mail fraud when he took bribes to
influence the setting of racing dates. The court’s theory was that he defrauded the citizenry of its right to
his “honest and faithful services” as governor. [1]
Violations of the Food and Drug Act
The federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act prohibits any person or corporation from sending into
interstate commerce any adulterated or misbranded food, drug, cosmetics, or related device. For example,
in a 2010 case, Allergen had to pay a criminal fine for marketing Botox as a headache or pain reliever, a
use that had not been approved by the Food and Drug Administration. Unlike most criminal statutes,
willfulness or deliberate misconduct is not an element of the act. As the United States v. Park case
(Section 6.7 "Cases") shows, an executive can be held criminally liable even though he may have had no
personal knowledge of the violation.
Environmental Crimes
Many federal environmental statutes have criminal provisions. These include the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act (commonly called the Clean Water Act); the Rivers and Harbors Act of 1899 (the Refuse Act);
the Clean Air Act; the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA); the Toxic Substances
Control Act (TSCA); and the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). Under the Clean Water
Act, for example, wrongful discharge of pollutants into navigable waters carries a fine ranging from
$2,500 to $25,000 per day and imprisonment for up to one year. “Responsible corporate officers” are
specifically included as potential defendants in criminal prosecutions under the act. They can include
officers who have responsibility over a project where subcontractors and their employees actually caused
the discharge. [2]
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
240
Violations of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act
As a byproduct of Watergate, federal officials at the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Internal
Revenue Service uncovered many instances of bribes paid by major corporations to officials of foreign
governments to win contracts with those governments. Congress responded in 1977 with the Foreign
Corrupt Practices Act, which imposed a stringent requirement that the disposition of assets be accurately
and fairly accounted for in a company’s books and records. The act also made illegal the payment of bribes
to foreign officials or to anyone who will transmit the money to a foreign official to assist the payer (the
one offering and delivering the money) in getting business.
Violations of the Racketeering Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act
In 1970 Congress enacted the Racketeering Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO), aimed at
ending organized crime’s infiltration into legitimate business. The act tells courts to construe its language
broadly “to effectuate its remedial purpose,” and many who are not part of organized crime have been
successfully prosecuted under the act. It bans a “pattern of racketeering,” defined as the commission of at
least two acts within ten years of any of a variety of already-existing crimes, including mail, wire, and
securities fraud. The act thus makes many types of fraud subject to severe penalties.
Computer Crime
Computer crime generally falls into four categories: (1) theft of money, financial instruments, or property;
(2) misappropriation of computer time; (3) theft of programs; and (4) illegal acquisition of information.
The main federal statutory framework for many computer crimes is the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act
(CFAA; see Table 6.1 "Summary of Provisions of the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act"). Congress only
prohibited computer fraud and abuse where there was a federal interest, as where computers of the
government were involved or where the crime was interstate in nature.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
241
Table 6.1 Summary of Provisions of the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act
Obtaining national security information Sec. (a)(1) 10 years maximum (20 years second offense)
Trespassing in a government computer Sec. (a)(3) 1 year (5)
Compromising the confidentiality of a computer Sec. (a)(2) 1 year (10)
Accessing a computer to defraud and obtain value Sec. (a)4 5 years (10)
Intentional access and reckless damage (a)(5)(A)(ii) 5 years (20)
Trafficking in passwords (a)(6) 1 year (10)
KEY TAKEAWAY
Offenses can be against persons, against property, or against public policy (as when you bribe a public
official, commit perjury, use public goods such as the mails or the Internet to commit fraud, or commit
other white-collar crimes).
EXERCISES
1. Which does more serious harm to society: street crimes or white-collar crimes?
2. Why are various crimes so difficult to define precisely?
3. Hungry Harold goes by the home of Juanita Martinez. Juanita has just finished baking a cherry pie and
sets it in the open windowsill to cool. Harold smells the pie from the sidewalk. It is twilight; while still
light, the sun has officially set. Harold reaches into the window frame and removes the pie.
Technically, has Harold committed burglary? What are the issues here based on the definition of
burglary?
4. What is fraud? How is it different from dishonesty? Is being dishonest a criminal offense? If so, have
you been a criminal already today?
[1] United States v. Isaacs, 493 F.2d 1124 (7th Cir. 1974), cert. denied, 417 US 976 (1974).
[2] U.S. v. Hanousek, 176 F.3d 1116 (9th Cir. 1999).
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
242
6.3 The Nature of a Criminal Act
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Understand how it is possible to commit a criminal act without actually doing anything that you think
might be criminal.
2. Analyze and explain the importance of intention in criminal law and criminal prosecutions.
3. Explain how a corporation can be guilty of a crime, even though it is a corporation’s agents that
commit the crime.
To be guilty of a crime, you must have acted. Mental desire or intent to do so is insufficient. But what
constitutes an act? This question becomes important when someone begins to commit a crime, or does so
in association with others, or intends to do one thing but winds up doing something else.
Attempt
It is not necessary to commit the intended crime to be found guilty of a criminal offense. An attempt to
commit the crime is punishable as well, though usually not as severely. For example, Brett points a gun at
Ashley, intending to shoot her dead. He pulls the trigger but his aim is off, and he misses her heart by four
feet. He is guilty of an attempt to murder. Suppose, however, that earlier in the day, when he was
preparing to shoot Ashley, Brett had been overheard in his apartment muttering to himself of his
intention, and that a neighbor called the police. When they arrived, he was just snapping his gun into his
shoulder holster.
At that point, courts in most states would not consider him guilty of an attempt because he had not passed
beyond the stage of preparation. After having buttoned his jacket he might have reconsidered and put the
gun away. Determining when the accused has passed beyond mere preparation and taken an actual step
toward perpetrating the crime is often difficult and is usually for the jury to decide.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
243
Impossibility
What if a defendant is accused of attempting a crime that is factually impossible? For example, suppose
that men believed they were raping a drunken, unconscious woman, and were later accused of attempted
rape, but defended on the grounds of factual impossibility because the woman was actually dead at the
time sexual intercourse took place? Or suppose that a husband intended to poison his wife with
strychnine in her coffee, but put sugar in the coffee instead? The “mens rea” or criminal intent was there,
but the act itself was not criminal (rape requires a live victim, and murder by poisoning requires the use of
poison). States are divided on this, but thirty-seven states have ruled out factual impossibility as a defense
to the crime of attempt.
Legal impossibility is different, and is usually acknowledged as a valid defense. If the defendant completes
all of his intended acts, but those acts do not fulfill all the required elements of a crime, there could be a
successful “impossibility” defense. If Barney (who has poor sight), shoots at a tree stump, thinking it is his
neighbor, Ralph, intending to kill him, has he committed an attempt? Many courts would hold that he has
not. But the distinction between factual impossibility and legal impossibility is not always clear, and the
trend seems to be to punish the intended attempt.
Conspiracy
Under both federal and state laws, it is a separate offense to work with others toward the commission of a
crime. When two or more people combine to carry out an unlawful purpose, they are engaged in a
conspiracy. The law of conspiracy is quite broad, especially when it is used by prosecutors in connection
with white-collar crimes. Many people can be swept up in the net of conspiracy, because it is unnecessary
to show that the actions they took were sufficient to constitute either the crime or an attempt. Usually, the
prosecution needs to show only (1) an agreement and (2) a single overt act in furtherance of the
conspiracy. Thus if three people agree to rob a bank, and if one of them goes to a store to purchase a gun
to be used in the holdup, the three can be convicted of conspiracy to commit robbery. Even the purchase
of an automobile to be used as the getaway car could support a conspiracy conviction.
The act of any one of the conspirators is imputed to the other members of the conspiracy. It does not
matter, for instance, that only one of the bank robbers fired the gun that killed a guard. All can be 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
244
convicted of murder. That is so even if one of the conspirators was stationed as a lookout several blocks
away and even if he specifically told the others that his agreement to cooperate would end “just as soon as
there is shooting.”
Agency and Corporations
A person can be guilty of a crime if he acts through another. Again, the usual reason for “imputing” the
guilt of the actor to another is that both were engaged in a conspiracy. But imputation of guilt is not
limited to a conspiracy. The agent may be innocent even though he participates. A corporate officer
directs a junior employee to take a certain bag and deliver it to the officer’s home. The employee
reasonably believes that the officer is entitled to the bag. Unbeknownst to the employee, the bag contains
money that belongs to the company, and the officer wishes to keep it. This is not a conspiracy. The
employee is not guilty of larceny, but the officer is, because the agent’s act is imputed to him.
Since intent is a necessary component of crime, an agent’s intent cannot be imputed to his principal if the
principal did not share the intent. The company president tells her sales manager, “Go make sure our
biggest customer renews his contract for next year”—by which she meant, “Don’t ignore our biggest
customer.” Standing before the customer’s purchasing agent, the sales manager threatens to tell the
purchasing agent’s boss that the purchasing agent has been cheating on his expense account, unless he
signs a new contract. The sales manager could be convicted of blackmail, but the company president could
not.
Can a corporation be guilty of a crime? For many types of crimes, the guilt of individual employees may be
imputed to the corporation. Thus the antitrust statutes explicitly state that the corporation may be
convicted and fined for violations by employees. This is so even though the shareholders are the ones who
ultimately must pay the price—and who may have had nothing to do with the crime or the power to stop
it. The law of corporate criminal responsibility has been changing in recent years. The tendency is to hold
the corporation liable under criminal law if the act has been directed by a responsible officer or group
within the corporation (the president or board of directors).
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
245
KEY TAKEAWAY
Although proving the intent to commit a crime (the mens rea) is essential, the intent can be
established by inference (circumstantially). Conspirators may not actually commit a crime, for example,
but in preparing for a criminal act, they may be guilty of the crime of conspiracy. Certain corporate
officers, as well, may not be directly committing criminal acts but may be held criminally responsible
for acts of their agents and contractors.
EXERCISES
1. Give an example of how someone can intend to commit a crime but fail to commit one.
2. Describe a situation where there is a conspiracy to commit a crime without the crime actually taking
place.
3. Create a scenario based on current events where a corporation could be found guilty of committing a
crime even though the CEO, the board of directors, and the shareholders have not themselves done a
criminal act.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
246
6.4 Responsibility
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Explain why criminal law generally requires that the defendant charged with a crime have criminal
"intent."
2. Know and explain the possible excuses relating to responsibility that are legally recognized by courts,
including lack of capacity.
In General
The mens rea requirement depends on the nature of the crime and all the circumstances surrounding the
act. In general, though, the requirement means that the accused must in some way have intended the
criminal consequences of his act. Suppose, for example, that Charlie gives Gabrielle a poison capsule to
swallow. That is the act. If Gabrielle dies, is Charlie guilty of murder? The answer depends on what his
state of mind was. Obviously, if he gave it to her intending to kill her, the act was murder.
What if he gave it to her knowing that the capsule was poison but believing that it would only make her
mildly ill? The act is still murder, because we are all liable for the consequences of any intentional act that
may cause harm to others. But suppose that Gabrielle had asked Harry for aspirin, and he handed her two
pills that he reasonably believed to be aspirin (they came from the aspirin bottle and looked like aspirin)
but that turned out to be poison, the act would not be murder, because he had neither intent nor a state of
knowledge from which intent could be inferred.
Not every criminal law requires criminal intent as an ingredient of the crime. Many regulatory codes
dealing with the public health and safety impose strict requirements. Failure to adhere to such
requirements is a violation, whether or not the violator had mens rea. The United States v.
Park case, Section 6.7 "Cases", a decision of the US Supreme Court, shows the different considerations
involved in mens rea.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
247
Excuses That Limit or Overcome Responsibility
Mistake of Fact and Mistake of Law
Ordinarily, ignorance of the law is not an excuse. If you believe that it is permissible to turn right on a red
light but the city ordinance prohibits it, your belief, even if reasonable, does not excuse your violation of
the law. Under certain circumstances, however, ignorance of law will be excused. If a statute imposes
criminal penalties for an action taken without a license, and if the government official responsible for
issuing the license formally tells you that you do not need one (though in fact you do), a conviction for
violating the statute cannot stand. In rare cases, a lawyer’s advice, contrary to the statute, will be held to
excuse the client, but usually the client is responsible for his attorney’s mistakes. Otherwise, as it is said,
the lawyer would be superior to the law.
Ignorance or mistake of fact more frequently will serve as an excuse. If you take a coat from a restaurant,
believing it to be yours, you cannot be convicted of larceny if it is not. Your honest mistake of fact negates
the requisite intent. In general, the rule is that a mistaken belief of fact will excuse criminal responsibility
if (1) the belief is honestly held, (2) it is reasonable to hold it, and (3) the act would not have been criminal
if the facts were as the accused supposed them to have been.
Entrapment
One common technique of criminal investigation is the use of an undercover agent or decoy—the
policeman who poses as a buyer of drugs from a street dealer or the elaborate “sting” operations in which
ostensibly stolen goods are “sold” to underworld “fences.” Sometimes these methods are the only way by
which certain kinds of crime can be rooted out and convictions secured.
But a rule against entrapment limits the legal ability of the police to play the role of criminals. The police
are permitted to use such techniques to detect criminal activity; they are not permitted to do so to
instigate crime. The distinction is usually made between a person who intends to commit a crime and one
who does not. If the police provide the former with an opportunity to commit a criminal act—the sale of
drugs to an undercover agent, for example—there is no defense of entrapment. But if the police knock on
the door of one not known to be a drug user and persist in a demand that he purchase drugs from them, 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
248
finally overcoming his will to resist, a conviction for purchase and possession of drugs can be overturned
on the ground of entrapment.
Other Excuses
A number of other circumstances can limit or excuse criminal liability. These include compulsion (a gun
pointed at one’s head by a masked man who apparently is unafraid to use the weapon and who demands
that you help him rob a store), honest consent of the “victim” (the quarterback who is tackled), adherence
to the requirements of legitimate public authority lawfully exercised (a policeman directs a towing
company to remove a car parked in a tow-away zone), the proper exercise of domestic authority (a parent
may spank a child, within limits), and defense of self, others, property, and habitation. Each of these
excuses is a complex subject in itself.
Lack of Capacity
A further defense to criminal prosecution is the lack of mental capacity to commit the crime. Infants and
children are considered incapable of committing a crime; under common law any child under the age of
seven could not be prosecuted for any act. That age of incapacity varies from state to state and is now
usually defined by statutes. Likewise, insanity or mental disease or defect can be a complete defense.
Intoxication can be a defense to certain crimes, but the mere fact of drunkenness is not ordinarily
sufficient.
KEY TAKEAWAY
In the United States, some crimes can be committed by not following strict regulatory requirements for
health, safety, or the environment. The law does provide excuses from criminal liability for mistakes of
fact, entrapment, and lack of capacity.
EXERCISES
1. Describe several situations in which compulsion, consent, or other excuses take away criminal liability.
2. Your employee is drunk on the job and commits the crime of assault and battery on a customer. He
claims lack of capacity as an excuse. Should the courts accept this excuse? Why or why not?
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
249
6.5 Procedure
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Describe the basic steps in pretrial criminal procedure that follow a government's determination to
arrest someone for an alleged criminal act.
2. Describe the basic elements of trial and post-trial criminal procedure.
The procedure for criminal prosecutions is complex. Procedures will vary from state to state. A criminal
case begins with an arrest if the defendant is caught in the act or fleeing from the scene; if the defendant is
not caught, a warrant for the defendant’s arrest will issue. The warrant is issued by a judge or a magistrate
upon receiving a complaint detailing the charge of a specific crime against the accused. It is not enough
for a police officer to go before a judge and say, “I’d like you to arrest Bonnie because I think she’s just
murdered Clyde.” She must supply enough information to satisfy the magistrate that there is probable
cause (reasonable grounds) to believe that the accused committed the crime. The warrant will be issued to
any officer or agency that has power to arrest the accused with warrant in hand.
The accused will be brought before the magistrate for a preliminary hearing. The purpose of the hearing is
to determine whether there is sufficient reason to hold the accused for trial. If so, the accused can be sent
to jail or be permitted to make bail. Bail is a sum of money paid to the court to secure the defendant’s
attendance at trial. If he fails to appear, he forfeits the money. Constitutionally, bail can be withheld only
if there is reason to believe that the accused will flee the jurisdiction.
Once the arrest is made, the case is in the hands of the prosecutor. In the fifty states, prosecution is a
function of the district attorney’s office. These offices are usually organized on a county-by-county basis.
In the federal system, criminal prosecution is handled by the office of the US attorney, one of whom is
appointed for every federal district.
Following the preliminary hearing, the prosecutor must either file information (a document stating the
crime of which the person being held is accused) or ask the grand jury for an indictment. The grand jury 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
250
consists of twenty-three people who sit to determine whether there is sufficient evidence to warrant a
prosecution. It does not sit to determine guilt or innocence. The indictment is the grand jury’s formal
declaration of charges on which the accused will be tried. If indicted, the accused formally becomes a
defendant.
The defendant will then be arraigned, that is, brought before a judge to answer the accusation in the
indictment. The defendant may plead guilty or not guilty. If he pleads not guilty, the case will be tried
before a jury (sometimes referred to as a petit jury). The jury cannot convict unless it finds the defendant
guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
The defendant might have pleaded guilty to the offense or to a lesser charge (often referred to as a “lesser
included offense”—simple larceny, for example, is a lesser included offense of robbery because the
defendant may not have used violence but nevertheless stole from the victim). Such a plea is usually
arranged through plea bargaining with the prosecution. In return for the plea, the prosecutor promises to
recommend to the judge that the sentence be limited. The judge most often, but not always, goes along
with the prosecutor’s recommendation.
The defendant is also permitted to file a plea of nolo contendere (no contest) in prosecutions for certain
crimes. In so doing, he neither affirms nor denies his guilt. He may be sentenced as though he had
pleaded guilty, although usually a nolo plea is the result of a plea bargain. Why plead nolo? In some
offenses, such as violations of the antitrust laws, the statutes provide that private plaintiffs may use a
conviction or a guilty plea as proof that the defendant violated the law. This enables a plaintiff to prove
liability without putting on witnesses or evidence and reduces the civil trial to a hearing about the
damages to plaintiff. The nolo plea permits the defendant to avoid this, so that any plaintiff will have to
not only prove damages but also establish civil liability.
Following a guilty plea or a verdict of guilt, the judge will impose a sentence after presentencing reports
are written by various court officials (often, probation officers). Permissible sentences are spelled out in
statutes, though these frequently give the judge a range within which to work (e.g., twenty years to life).
The judge may sentence the defendant to imprisonment, a fine, or both, or may decide to suspend
sentence (i.e., the defendant will not have to serve the sentence as long as he stays out of trouble).
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
251
Sentencing usually comes before appeal. As in civil cases, the defendant, now convicted, has the right to
take at least one appeal to higher courts, where issues of procedure and constitutional rights may be
argued.
KEY TAKEAWAY
Criminal procedure in US courts is designed to provide a fair process to both criminal defendants and
to society. The grand jury system, prosecutorial discretion, plea bargains, and appeals for lack of a fair
trial are all part of US criminal procedure.
EXERCISES
1. Harold is charged with the crime of assault with a deadly weapon with intent to kill or inflict serious
bodily injury. It is a more serious crime than simple assault. Harold’s attorney wants the prosecutor to
give Harold a break, but Harold is guilty of at least simple assault and may also have had the intent to
kill. What is Harold’s attorney likely to do?
2. Kumar was driving his car, smoking marijuana, and had an accident with another vehicle. The other
driver was slightly injured. When the officer arrived, she detected a strong odor of marijuana in
Kumar’s car and a small amount of marijuana in the glove compartment. The other driver expects to
bring a civil action against Kumar for her injuries after Kumar’s criminal case. What should Kumar
plead in the criminal case—careless driving or driving under the influence?
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
252
6.6 Constitutional Rights of the Accused
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Describe the most significant constitutional rights of defendants in US courts, and name the source of
these rights.
2. Explain the Exclusionary rule and the reason for its existence.
Search and Seizure
The rights of those accused of a crime are spelled out in four of the ten constitutional amendments that
make up the Bill of Rights (Amendments Four, Five, Six, and Eight). For the most part, these
amendments have been held to apply to both the federal and the state governments. The Fourth
Amendment says in part that “the right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and
effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated.” Although there are numerous
and tricky exceptions to the general rule, ordinarily the police may not break into a person’s house or
confiscate his papers or arrest him unless they have a warrant to do so. This means, for instance, that a
policeman cannot simply stop you on a street corner and ask to see what is in your pockets (a power the
police enjoy in many other countries), nor can your home be raided without probable cause to believe that
you have committed a crime. What if the police do search or seize unreasonably?
The courts have devised a remedy for the use at trial of the fruits of an unlawful search or seizure.
Evidence that is unconstitutionally seized is excluded from the trial. This is the so-called exclusionary
rule, first made applicable in federal cases in 1914 and brought home to the states in 1961.
The exclusionary rules highly controversial, and there are numerous exceptions to it. But it remains
generally true that the prosecutor may not use evidence willfully taken by the police in violation of 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
253
constitutional rights generally, and most often in the violation of Fourth Amendment rights. (The fruits of
a coerced confession are also excluded.)
Double Jeopardy
The Fifth Amendment prohibits the government from prosecuting a person twice for the same offense.
The amendment says that no person shall be “subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of
life or limb.” If a defendant is acquitted, the government may not appeal. If a defendant is convicted and
his conviction is upheld on appeal, he may not thereafter be re-prosecuted for the same crime.
Self-Incrimination
The Fifth Amendment is also the source of a person’s right against self-incrimination (no person “shall be
compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself”). The debate over the limits of this right
has given rise to an immense literature. In broadest outline, the right against self-incrimination means
that the prosecutor may not call a defendant to the witness stand during trial and may not comment to the
jury on the defendant’s failure to take the stand. Moreover, a defendant’s confession must be excluded
from evidence if it was not voluntarily made (e.g., if the police beat the person into giving a confession).
In Miranda v. Arizona, the Supreme Court ruled that no confession is admissible if the police have not
first advised a suspect of his constitutional rights, including the right to have a lawyer present to advise
him during the questioning. [1] These so-called Miranda warnings have prompted scores of follow-up cases
that have made this branch of jurisprudence especially complex.
Speedy Trial
The Sixth Amendment tells the government that it must try defendants speedily. How long a delay is too
long depends on the circumstances in each case. In 1975, Congress enacted the Speedy Trial Act to give
priority to criminal cases in federal courts. It requires all criminal prosecutions to go to trial within
seventy-five days (though the law lists many permissible reasons for delay).
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
254
Cross-Examination
The Sixth Amendment also says that the defendant shall have the right to confront witnesses against him.
No testimony is permitted to be shown to the jury unless the person making it is present and subject to
cross-examination by the defendant’s counsel.
Assistance of Counsel
The Sixth Amendment guarantees criminal defendants the right to have the assistance of defense counsel.
During the eighteenth century and before, the British courts frequently refused to permit defendants to
have lawyers in the courtroom during trial. The right to counsel is much broader in this country, as the
result of Supreme Court decisions that require the state to pay for a lawyer for indigent defendants in
most criminal cases.
Cruel and Unusual Punishment
Punishment under the common law was frequently horrifying. Death was a common punishment for
relatively minor crimes. In many places throughout the world, punishments still persist that seem cruel
and unusual, such as the practice of stoning someone to death. The guillotine, famously in use during and
after the French Revolution, is no longer used, nor is defendants put in stocks for public display and
humiliation. In pre-Revolutionary America, an unlucky defendant who found himself convicted could face
brutal torture before death.
The Eighth Amendment banned these actions with the words that “cruel and unusual punishments [shall
not be] inflicted.” Virtually all such punishments either never were enacted or have been eliminated from
the statute books in the United States. Nevertheless, the Eighth Amendment has become a source of
controversy, first with the Supreme Court’s ruling in 1976 that the death penalty, as haphazardly applied
in the various states, amounted to cruel and unusual punishment. Later Supreme Court opinions have
made it easier for states to administer the death penalty. As of 2010, there were 3,300 defendants on
death row in the United States. Of course, no corporation is on death row, and no corporation’s charter
has ever been revoked by a US state, even though some corporations have repeatedly been indicted and
convicted of criminal offenses.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
255
Presumption of Innocence
The most important constitutional right in the US criminal justice system is the presumption of
innocence. The Supreme Court has repeatedly cautioned lower courts in the United States that juries must
be properly instructed that the defendant is innocent until proven guilty. This is the origin of the “beyond
all reasonable doubt” standard of proof and is an instruction given to juries in each criminal case. The
Fifth Amendment notes the right of “due process” in federal proceedings, and the Fourteenth Amendment
requires that each state provide “due process” to defendants.
KEY TAKEAWAY
The US Constitution provides several important protections for criminal defendants, including a
prohibition on the use of evidence that has been obtained by unconstitutional means. This would
include evidence seized in violation of the Fourth Amendment and confessions obtained in violation of
the Fifth Amendment.
EXERCISES
1. Do you think it is useful to have a presumption of innocence in criminal cases? What if there was not a
presumption of innocence in criminal cases?
2. Do you think public humiliation, public execution, and unusual punishments would reduce the amount
of crime? Why do you think so?
3. “Due process” is another phrase for “fairness.” Why should the public show fairness toward criminal
defendants?
[1] Miranda v. Arizona, 384 US 436 (1966).
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
256
6.7 Cases
False Pretenses
State v. Mills
96 Ariz. 377, 396 P.2d 5 (Ariz. 1964)
LOCKWOOD, VICE CHIEF JUSTICE
Defendants appeal from a conviction on two counts of obtaining money by false pretenses in violation of
AR.S. §§ 13-661.A3. and 13-663.A1. The material facts, viewed “…in the light most favorable to sustaining
the conviction,” are as follows: Defendant William Mills was a builder and owned approximately 150
homes in Tucson in December, 1960. Mills conducted his business in his home. In 1960 defendant
Winifred Mills, his wife, participated in the business generally by answering the telephone, typing, and
receiving clients who came to the office.
In December 1960, Mills showed the complainant, Nathan Pivowar, a house at 1155 Knox Drive and
another at 1210 Easy Street, and asked Pivowar if he would loan money on the Knox Drive house. Pivowar
did not indicate at that time whether he would agree to such a transaction. Later in the same month
Nathan Pivowar told the defendants that he and his brother, Joe Pivowar, would loan $5,000 and $4,000
on the two houses. Three or four days later Mrs. Mills, at Pivowar’s request, showed him these homes
again.
Mills had prepared two typed mortgages for Pivowar. Pivowar objected to the wording, so in Mills’ office
Mrs. Mills retyped the mortgages under Pivowar’s dictation. After the mortgages had been recorded on
December 31, 1960, Pivowar gave Mills a bank check for $5,791.87, some cash, and a second mortgage
formerly obtained from Mills in the approximate sum of $3,000. In exchange Mills gave Pivowar two
personal notes in the sums of $5,250.00 and $4,200.00 and the two mortgages as security for the loan.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
257
Although the due date for Mills’ personal notes passed without payment being made, the complainant did
not present the notes for payment, did not demand that they be paid, and did not sue upon them. In 1962
the complainant learned that the mortgages which he had taken as security in the transaction were not
first mortgages on the Knox Drive and Easy Street properties. These mortgages actually covered two
vacant lots on which there were outstanding senior mortgages. On learning this, Pivowar signed a
complaint charging the defendants with the crime of theft by false pretenses.
On appeal defendants contend that the trial court erred in denying their motion to dismiss the
information. They urge that a permanent taking of property must be proved in order to establish the
crime of theft. Since the complainant had the right to sue on the defendants’ notes, the defendants assert
that complainant cannot be said to have been deprived of his property permanently. Defendants
misconceive the elements of the crime of theft by false pretenses. Stated in a different form, their
argument is that although the complainant has parted with his cash, a bank check, and a second
mortgage, the defendants intend to repay the loan.
Defendants admit that the proposition of law which they assert is a novel one in this jurisdiction.
Respectable authority in other states persuades us that their contention is without merit. A creditor has a
right to determine for him whether he wishes to be a secured or an unsecured creditor. In the former case,
he has a right to know about the security. If he extends credit in reliance upon security which is falsely
represented to be adequate, he has been defrauded even if the debtor intends to repay the debt. His
position is now that of an unsecured creditor. At the very least, an unreasonable risk of loss has been
forced upon him by reason of the deceit. This risk which he did not intend to assume has been imposed
upon him by the intentional act of the debtor, and such action constitutes intent to defraud.
* * *
The cases cited by defendants in support of their contention are distinguishable from the instant case in
that they involved theft by larceny. Since the crime of larceny is designed to protect a person’s possessory
interest in property whereas the crime of false pretenses protects one’s title interest, the requirement of a
permanent deprivation is appropriate to the former. Accordingly, we hold that intent to repay a loan
obtained on the basis of a false representation of the security for the loan is no defense.
* * *
Affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded for resentencing.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
258
CASE QUESTIONS
1. False pretenses are a crime of obtaining ownership of property of another by making untrue
representations of fact with intent to defraud. What were the untrue representations of fact made by
Mills?
2. Concisely state the defendant’s argument as to why Pivowar has not been deprived of any property.
3. If Pivowar had presented the notes and Mills had paid, would a crime have been committed?
White-Collar Crimes
United States v. Park
421 U.S. 658 (1975)
MR. CHIEF JUSTICE BURGER delivered the opinion of the Court.
We granted certiorari to consider whether the jury instructions in the prosecution of a corporate officer
under § 301 (k) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 52 Stat. 1042, as amended, 21 U.S.C. § 331
(k), were appropriate under United States v. Dotterweich, 320 U.S. 277 (1943). Acme Markets, Inc., is a
national retail food chain with approximately 36,000 employees, 874 retail outlets, 12 general
warehouses, and four special warehouses. Its headquarters, including the office of the president,
respondent Park, who is chief executive officer of the corporation, are located in Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. In a five-count information filed in the United States District Court for the District of
Maryland, the Government charged Acme and respondent with violations of the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act. Each count of the information alleged that the defendants had received food that had been
shipped in interstate commerce and that, while the food was being held for sale in Acme’s Baltimore
warehouse following shipment in interstate commerce, they caused it to be held in a building accessible to
rodents and to be exposed to contamination by rodents. These acts were alleged to have resulted in the
food’s being adulterated within the meaning of 21 U.S.C. §§ 342 (a)(3) and (4), in violation of 21 U.S.C. §
331 (k).
Acme pleaded guilty to each count of the information. Respondent pleaded not guilty. The evidence at
trial demonstrated that in April 1970 the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) advised respondent by
letter of insanitary conditions in Acme’s Philadelphia warehouse. In 1971 the FDA found that similar
conditions existed in the firm’s Baltimore warehouse. An FDA consumer safety officer testified concerning
evidence of rodent infestation and other insanitary conditions discovered during a 12-day inspection of 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
259
the Baltimore warehouse in November and December 1971. He also related that a second inspection of the
warehouse had been conducted in March 1972. On that occasion the inspectors found that there had been
improvement in the sanitary conditions, but that “there was still evidence of rodent activity in the building
and in the warehouses and we found some rodent-contaminated lots of food items.”
The Government also presented testimony by the Chief of Compliance of the FDA’s Baltimore office, who
informed respondent by letter of the conditions at the Baltimore warehouse after the first inspection.
There was testimony by Acme’s Baltimore division vice president, who had responded to the letter on
behalf of Acme and respondent and who described the steps taken to remedy the insanitary conditions
discovered by both inspections. The Government’s final witness, Acme’s vice president for legal affairs
and assistant secretary, identified respondent as the president and chief executive officer of the company
and read a bylaw prescribing the duties of the chief executive officer. He testified that respondent
functioned by delegating “normal operating duties” including sanitation, but that he retained “certain
things, which are the big, broad, principles of the operation of the company and had “the responsibility of
seeing that they all work together.”
At the close of the Government’s case in chief, respondent moved for a judgment of acquittal on the
ground that “the evidence in chief has shown that Mr. Park is not personally concerned in this Food and
Drug violation.” The trial judge denied the motion, stating that United States v. Dotterweich, 320 U.S. 277
(1943), was controlling.
Respondent was the only defense witness. He testified that, although all of Acme’s employees were in a
sense under his general direction, the company had an “organizational structure for responsibilities for
certain functions” according to which different phases of its operation were “assigned to individuals who,
in turn, have staff and departments under them.” He identified those individuals responsible for
sanitation, and related that upon receipt of the January 1972 FDA letter, he had conferred with the vice
president for legal affairs, who informed him that the Baltimore division vice president “was investigating
the situation immediately and would be taking corrective action and would be preparing a summary of the
corrective action to reply to the letter.” Respondent stated that he did not “believe there was anything [he]
could have done more constructively than what [he] found was being done.”
On cross-examination, respondent conceded that providing sanitary conditions for food offered for sale to
the public was something that he was “responsible for in the entire operation of the company” and he 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
260
stated that it was one of many phases of the company that he assigned to “dependable subordinates.”
Respondent was asked about and, over the objections of his counsel, admitted receiving, the April 1970
letter addressed to him from the FDA regarding insanitary conditions at Acme’s Philadelphia warehouse.
He acknowledged that, with the exception of the division vice president, the same individuals had
responsibility for sanitation in both Baltimore and Philadelphia. Finally, in response to questions
concerning the Philadelphia and Baltimore incidents, respondent admitted that the Baltimore problem
indicated the system for handling sanitation “wasn’t working perfectly” and that as Acme’s chief executive
officer he was “responsible for any result which occurs in our company.”
At the close of the evidence, respondent’s renewed motion for a judgment of acquittal was denied. The
relevant portion of the trial judge’s instructions to the jury challenged by respondent is set out in the
margin. Respondent’s counsel objected to the instructions on the ground that they failed fairly to reflect
our decision in United States v. Dotterweich supra, and to define “‘responsible relationship.’” The trial
judge overruled the objection. The jury found respondent guilty on all counts of the information, and he
was subsequently sentenced to pay a fine of $50 on each count. The Court of Appeals reversed the
conviction and remanded for a new trial.
* * *
The question presented by the Government’s petition for certiorari in United States v. Dotterweich, and
the focus of this Court’s opinion, was whether the manager of a corporation, as well as the corporation
itself, may be prosecuted under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act of 1938 for the introduction of
misbranded and adulterated articles into interstate commerce. In Dotterweich, a jury had disagreed as to
the corporation, a jobber purchasing drugs from manufacturers and shipping them in interstate
commerce under its own label, but had convicted Dotterweich, the corporation’s president and general
manager. The Court of Appeals reversed the conviction on the ground that only the drug dealer, whether
corporation or individual, was subject to the criminal provisions of the Act, and that where the dealer was
a corporation, an individual connected therewith might be held personally only if he was operating the
corporation as his ‘alter ego.’
In reversing the judgment of the Court of Appeals and reinstating Dotterweich’s conviction, this Court
looked to the purposes of the Act and noted that they “touch phases of the lives and health of people
which, in the circumstances of modern industrialism, are largely beyond self-protection. It observed that 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
261
the Act is of “a now familiar type” which “dispenses with the conventional requirement for criminal
conduct-awareness of some wrongdoing: In the interest of the larger good it puts the burden of acting at
hazard upon a person otherwise innocent but standing in responsible relation to a public danger. Central
to the Court’s conclusion that individuals other than proprietors are subject to the criminal provisions of
the Act was the reality that the only way in which a corporation can act is through the individuals, who act
on its behalf.
* * *
The Court recognized that, because the Act dispenses with the need to prove “consciousness of
wrongdoing,” it may result in hardship even as applied to those who share “responsibility in the business
process resulting in” a violation.…The rule that corporate employees who have “a responsible share in the
furtherance of the transaction which the statute outlaws” are subject to the criminal provisions of the Act
was not formulated in a vacuum. Cf. Morissette v. United States, 342 U.S. 246, 258 (1952). Cases under
the Federal Food and Drugs Act of 1906 reflected the view both that knowledge or intent were not
required to be proved in prosecutions under its criminal provisions, and that responsible corporate agents
could be subjected to the liability thereby imposed.
* * *
The rationale of the interpretation given the Act in Dotterweich…has been confirmed in our subsequent
cases. Thus, the Court has reaffirmed the proposition that the public interest in the purity of its food is so
great as to warrant the imposition of the highest standard of care on distributors.
Thus Dotterweich and the cases which have followed reveal that in providing sanctions which reach and
touch the individuals who execute the corporate mission—and this is by no means necessarily confined to
a single corporate agent or employee—the Act imposes not only a positive duty to seek out and remedy
violations when they occur but also, and primarily, a duty to implement measures that will insure that
violations will not occur. The requirements of foresight and vigilance imposed on responsible corporate
agents are beyond question demanding, and perhaps onerous, but they are no more stringent than the
public has a right to expect of those who voluntarily assume positions of authority in business enterprises
whose services and products affect the health and well-being of the public that supports them.
* * *
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
262
Reading the entire charge satisfies us that the jury’s attention was adequately focused on the issue of
respondent’s authority with respect to the conditions that formed the basis of the alleged violations.
Viewed as a whole, the charge did not permit the jury to find guilt solely on the basis of respondent’s
position in the corporation; rather, it fairly advised the jury that to find guilt it must find respondent “had
a responsible relation to the situation,” and “by virtue of his position…had…authority and responsibility”
to deal with the situation.
The situation referred to could only be “food…held in unsanitary conditions in a warehouse with the result
that it consisted, in part, of filth or…may have been contaminated with filth.”
Our conclusion that the Court of Appeals erred in its reading of the jury charge suggests as well our
disagreement with that court concerning the admissibility of evidence demonstrating that respondent was
advised by the FDA in 1970 of insanitary conditions in Acme’s Philadelphia warehouse. We are satisfied
that the Act imposes the highest standard of care and permits conviction of responsible corporate officials
who, in light of this standard of care, have the power to prevent or correct violations of its provisions.
* * *
Reversed.
CASE QUESTIONS
1. Did Park have criminal intent to put adulterated food into commerce? If not, how can Park’s conduct
be criminalized?
2. To get a conviction, what does the prosecutor have to show, other than that Park was the CEO of
Acme and therefore responsible for what his company did or didn’t do?
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
263
6.8 Summary and Exercises
Summary
Criminal law is that branch of law governing offenses against society. Most criminal law requires a specific
intent to commit the prohibited act (although a very few economic acts, made criminal by modern
legislation, dispense with the requirement of intent). In this way, criminal law differs from much of civil
law—for example, from the tort of negligence, in which carelessness, rather than intent, can result in
liability.
Major crimes are known as felonies. Minor crimes are known as misdemeanors. Most people have a
general notion about familiar crimes, such as murder and theft. But conventional knowledge does not
suffice for understanding technical distinctions among related crimes, such as larceny, robbery, and false
pretenses. These distinctions can be important because an individual can be found guilty not merely for
committing one of the acts defined in the criminal law but also for attempting or conspiring to commit
such an act. It is usually easier to convict someone of attempt or conspiracy than to convict for the main
crime, and a person involved in a conspiracy to commit a felony may find that very little is required to put
him into serious trouble.
Of major concern to the business executive is white-collar crime, which encompasses a host of offenses,
including bribery, embezzlement, fraud, restraints of trade, and computer crime. Anyone accused of crime
should know that they always have the right to consult with a lawyer and should always does so.
EXERCISES
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
264
1. Bill is the chief executive of a small computer manufacturing company that desperately needs funds to
continue operating. One day a stranger comes to Bill to induce him to take part in a cocaine smuggling
deal that would net Bill millions of dollars. Unbeknownst to Bill, the stranger is an undercover
policeman. Bill tells the stranger to go away. The stranger persists, and after five months of arguing
and cajoling, the stranger wears down Bill’s will to resist. Bill agrees to take delivery of the cocaine and
hands over a down payment of $10,000 to the undercover agent, who promptly arrests him for
conspiracy to violate the narcotics laws. What defenses does Bill have?
2. You are the manager of a bookstore. A customer becomes irritated at having to stand in line and
begins to shout at the salesclerk for refusing to wait on him. You come out of your office and ask the
customer to calm down. He shouts at you. You tell him to leave. He refuses. So you and the salesclerk
pick him up and shove him bodily out the door. He calls the police to have you arrested for assault.
Should the police arrest you? Assuming that they do, how would you defend yourself in court?
3. Marilyn is arrested for arson against a nuclear utility, a crime under both state and federal law. She is
convicted in state court and sentenced to five years in jail. Then the federal government decides to
prosecute her for the same offense. Does she have a double-jeopardy defense against the federal
prosecution?
4. Tectonics, a US corporation, is bidding on a project in Nigeria, and its employee wins the bid by
secretly giving $100,000 to the Nigerian public official that has the most say about which company will
be awarded the contract. The contract is worth $80 million, and Tectonics expects to make at least
$50 million on the project. Has a crime under US law been committed?
5. Suppose that the CEO of Tectonics, Ted Nelson, is not actually involved in bribery of the Nigerian
public official Adetutu Adeleke. Instead, suppose that the CFO, Jamie Skillset, is very accomplished at
insulating both top management and the board of directors from some of the “operational realities”
within the company. Skillset knows that Whoopi Goldmine, a Nigerian employee of Tectonics, has
made the deal with Adeleke and secured the contract for Tectonics. Is it possible that Nelson, as well
as Skillset, can be found guilty of a crime?
6. You have graduated from college and, after working hard for ten years; have scraped enough money
together to make a down payment on a forty-acre farm within driving distance to the small city where
you work in Colorado. In town at lunch one day, you run into an old friend from high school, Hayley 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
265
Mills, who tells you that she is saving her money to start a high-end consignment shop in town. You
allow her to have a room in your house for a few months until she has enough money to go into
business. Over the following weeks, however, you realize that old acquaintances from high school are
stopping by almost daily for short visits. When you bring this up to Hayley, she admits that many old
friends are now relying on her for marijuana. She is not a licensed caregiver in Colorado and is clearly
violating the law. Out of loyalty, you tell her that she has three weeks to move out, but you do not
prevent her from continuing sales while she is there. What crime have you committed?
7. The Center Art Galleries—Hawaii sells artwork and much of it involves art by the famous surrealist
painter Salvador Dali. The federal government suspected the center of selling forged Dali artwork and
obtained search warrants for six locations controlled by the center. The warrants told the executing
officer to seize any items that were “evidence of violations of federal criminal law.” The warrants did
not describe the specific crime suspected, nor did the warrants limit the seizure of items solely to Dali
artwork or suspected Dali forgeries. Are these search warrants valid? [1]
8.
SELF -TEST QUESTIONS
1. Jared has made several loans to debtors who have declared bankruptcy. These are unsecured
claims. Jared “doctors” the documentation to show amounts owed that are higher than the
debtors actually owe. Later, Jared is charged with the federal criminal offense of filing false
claims. The standard (or “burden”) of proof that the US attorney must meet in the prosecution
is
a. beyond all doubt
b. beyond a reasonable doubt
c. clear and convincing evidence
d. a preponderance of the evidence
Jethro, a businessman who resides in Atlanta, creates a disturbance at a local steakhouse and
is arrested for being drunk and disorderly. Drunk and disorderly is a misdemeanor under
Georgia law. A misdemeanor is a crime punishable by imprisonment for up to
a. one year
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
266
b. two years
c. five years
d. none of the above
Yuan is charged with a crime. To find him guilty, the prosecutor must show
a. actus reus and mens rea
b. mens rea only
c. the performance of a prohibited act
d. none of the above
Kira works for Data Systems Ltd. and may be liable for larceny if she steals
a. a competitor’s trade secrets
b. company computer time
c. the use of Data Systems’ Internet for personal business
d. any of the above
Candace is constructing a new office building that is near its completion. She offers Paul $500
to overlook certain things that are noncompliant with the city’s construction code. Paul
accepts the money and overlooks the violations. Later, Candace is charged with the crime of
bribery. This occurred when
a. Candace offered the bribe.
b. Paul accepted the bribe.
c. Paul overlooked the violations.
d. none of the above
SELF -TEST ANSWERS
1. b
2. a
3. a
4. d
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
267
5. a
[1] Center Art Galleries—Hawaii, Inc. v. United States, 875 F.2d 747 (9th Cir. 1989).
Chapter 7
Introduction to Tort Law
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to do the following:
1. Know why most legal systems have tort law.
2. Identify the three kinds of torts.
3. Show how tort law relates to criminal law and contract law.
4. Understand negligent torts and defenses to claims of negligence.
5. Understand strict liability torts and the reasons for them in the US legal system.
In civil litigation, contract and tort claims are by far the most numerous. The law attempts to adjust for
harms done by awarding damages to a successful plaintiff who demonstrates that the defendant was the
cause of the plaintiff’s losses. Torts can be intentional torts, negligent torts, or strict liability torts.
Employers must be aware that in many circumstances, their employees may create liability in tort. This
chapter explains the different kind of torts, as well as available defenses to tort claims.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
268
7.1 Purpose of Tort Laws
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Explain why a sound market system requires tort law.
2. Define a tort and give two examples.
3. Explain the moral basis of tort liability.
4. Understand the purposes of damage awards in tort.
Definition of Tort
The term tort is the French equivalent of the English word wrong. The word tortis also derived from the
Latin word tortum, which means twisted or crooked or wrong, in contrast to the word rectum, which
means straight (rectitude uses that Latin root). Thus conduct that is twisted or crooked and not straight is
a tort. The term was introduced into the English law by the Norman jurists.
Long ago, tort was used in everyday speech; today it is left to the legal system. A judge will instruct a jury
that a tort is usually defined as a wrong for which the law will provide a remedy, most often in the form of
money damages. The law does not remedy all “wrongs.” The preceding definition of tort does not reveal
the underlying principles that divide wrongs in the legal sphere from those in the moral sphere. Hurting
someone’s feelings may be more devastating than saying something untrue about him behind his back; yet
the law will not provide a remedy for saying something cruel to someone directly, while it may provide a
remedy for "defaming" someone, orally or in writing, to others.
Although the word is no longer in general use, tort suits are the stuff of everyday headlines. More and
more people injured by exposure to a variety of risks now seek redress (some sort of remedy through the 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
269
courts). Headlines boast of multimillion-dollar jury awards against doctors who bungled operations,
against newspapers that libeled subjects of stories, and against oil companies that devastate entire
ecosystems. All are examples of tort suits.
The law of torts developed almost entirely in the common-law courts; that is, statutes passed by
legislatures were not the source of law that plaintiffs usually relied on. Usually, plaintiffs would rely on the
common law (judicial decisions). Through thousands of cases, the courts have fashioned a series of rules
that govern the conduct of individuals in their non-contractual dealings with each other. Through
contracts, individuals can craft their own rights and responsibilities toward each other. In the absence of
contracts, tort law holds individuals legally accountable for the consequences of their actions. Those who
suffer losses at the hands of others can be compensated.
Many acts (like homicide) are both criminal and tortious. But torts and crimes are different, and the
difference is worth noting. A crime is an act against the people as a whole. Society punishes the murderer;
it does not usually compensate the family of the victim. Tort law, on the other hand, views the death as a
private wrong for which damages are owed. In a civil case, the tort victim or his family, not the state,
brings the action. The judgment against a defendant in a civil tort suit is usually expressed in monetary
terms, not in terms of prison times or fines, and is the legal system’s way of trying to make up for the
victim’s loss.
Kinds of Torts
There are three kinds of torts: intentional torts, negligent torts, and strict liability torts. Intentional torts
arise from intentional acts, whereas unintentional torts often result from carelessness (e.g., when a
surgical team fails to remove a clamp from a patient’s abdomen when the operation is finished). Both
intentional torts and negligent torts imply some fault on the part of the defendant. In strict liability torts,
by contrast, there may be no fault at all, but tort law will sometimes require a defendant to make up for
the victim’s losses even where the defendant was not careless and did not intend to do harm.
Dimensions of Tort Liability
There is a clear moral basis for recovery through the legal system where the defendant has been careless
(negligent) or has intentionally caused harm. Using the concepts that we are free and autonomous beings 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
270
with basic rights, we can see that when others interfere with either our freedom or our autonomy, we will
usually react negatively. As the old saying goes, “Your right to swing your arm ends at the tip of my nose.”
The law takes this even one step further: under intentional tort law, if you frighten someone by swinging
your arms toward the tip of her nose, you may have committed the tort of assault, even if there is no actual
touching (battery).
Under a capitalistic market system, rational economic rules also call for no negative externalities. That is,
actions of individuals, either alone or in concert with others, should not negatively impact third parties.
The law will try to compensate third parties who are harmed by your actions, even as it knows that a
money judgment cannot actually mend a badly injured victim.
Figure 7.1 Dimensions of Tort Liability
Dimensions of Tort: Fault
Tort principles can be viewed along different dimensions. One is the fault dimension. Like criminal law,
tort law requires a wrongful act by a defendant for the plaintiff to recover. Unlike criminal law, however,
there need not be a specific intent. Since tort law focuses on injury to the plaintiff, it is less concerned than
criminal law about the reasons for the defendant’s actions. An innocent act or a relatively innocent one 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
271
may still provide the basis for liability. Nevertheless, tort law—except for strict liability—relies on
standards of fault, or blameworthiness.
The most obvious standard is willful conduct. If the defendant (often called the tort feasor—i.e., the one
committing the tort) intentionally injures another, there is little argument about tort liability. Thus all
crimes resulting in injury to a person or property (murder, assault, arson, etc.) are also torts, and the
plaintiff may bring a separate lawsuit to recover damages for injuries to his person, family, or property.
Most tort suits do not rely on intentional fault. They are based, rather, on negligent conduct that in the
circumstances is careless or poses unreasonable risks of causing damage. Most automobile accident and
medical malpractice suits are examples of negligence suits.
The fault dimension is a continuum. At one end is the deliberate desire to do injury. The middle ground is
occupied by careless conduct. At the other end is conduct that most would consider entirely blameless, in
the moral sense. The defendant may have observed all possible precautions and yet still be held liable.
This is called strict liability. An example is that incurred by the manufacturer of a defective product that is
placed on the market despite all possible precautions, including quality-control inspection. In many
states, if the product causes injury, the manufacturer will be held liable.
Dimensions of Tort: Nature of Injury
Tort liability varies by the type of injury caused. The most obvious type is physical harm to the person
(assault, battery, infliction of emotional distress, negligent exposure to toxic pollutants, wrongful death)
or property (trespass, nuisance, arson, interference with contract). Mental suffering can be redressed if it
is a result of physical injury (e.g., shock and depression following an automobile accident). A few states
now permit recovery for mental distress alone (a mother’s shock at seeing her son injured by a car while
both were crossing the street). Other protected interests include a person’s reputation (injured by
defamatory statements or writings), privacy (injured by those who divulge secrets of his personal life), and
economic interests (misrepresentation to secure an economic advantage, certain forms of unfair
competition).
Dimensions of Tort: Excuses
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
272
A third element in the law of torts is the excuse for committing an apparent wrong. The law does not
condemn every act that ultimately results in injury.
One common rule of exculpation is assumption of risk. A baseball fan who sits along the third base line
close to the infield assumes the risk that a line drive foul ball may fly toward him and strike him. He will
not be permitted to complain in court that the batter should have been more careful or that management
should have either warned him or put up a protective barrier.
Another excuse is negligence of the plaintiff. If two drivers are careless and hit each other on the highway,
some states will refuse to permit either to recover from the other. Still another excuse is consent: two
boxers in the ring consent to being struck with fists (but not to being bitten on the ear).
Damages
Since the purpose of tort law is to compensate the victim for harm actually done, damages are usually
measured by the extent of the injury. Expressed in money terms, these include replacement of property
destroyed, compensation for lost wages, reimbursement for medical expenses, and dollars that are
supposed to approximate the pain that is suffered. Damages for these injuries are called
compensatory damages.
In certain instances, the courts will permit an award of punitive damages. As the word punitive implies,
the purpose is to punish the defendant’s actions. Because a punitive award (sometimes called exemplary
damages) is at odds with the general purpose of tort law, it is allowable only in aggravated situations. The
law in most states permits recovery of punitive damages only when the defendant has deliberately
committed a wrong with malicious intent or has otherwise done something outrageous.
Punitive damages are rarely allowed in negligence cases for that reason. But if someone sets out
intentionally and maliciously to hurt another person, punitive damages may well be appropriate. Punitive
damages are intended not only to punish the wrongdoer, by exacting an additional and sometimes heavy
payment (the exact amount is left to the discretion of jury and judge), but also to deter others from similar
conduct. The punitive damage award has been subject to heavy criticism in recent years in cases in which
it has been awarded against manufacturers. One fear is that huge damage awards on behalf of a multitude
of victims could swiftly bankrupt the defendant. Unlike compensatory damages, punitive damages are
taxable.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
273
KEY TAKEAWAY
There are three kinds of torts, and in two of them (negligent torts and strict liability torts), damages are
usually limited to making the victim whole through an enforceable judgment for money damages.
These compensatory damages awarded by a court accomplish only approximate justice for the injuries
or property damage caused by a tortfeasor. Tort laws go a step further toward deterrence, beyond
compensation to the plaintiff, in occasionally awarding punitive damages against a defendant. These
are almost always in cases where an intentional tort has been committed.
EXERCISES
1. Why is deterrence needed for intentional torts (where punitive damages are awarded) rather than
negligent torts?
2. Why are costs imposed on others without their consent problematic for a market economy? What if
the law did not try to re-impose the victim’s costs onto the tortfeasor? What would a totally nonlitigious society be like?
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
274
7.2 Intentional Torts
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Distinguish intentional torts from other kinds of torts.
2. Give three examples of an intentional tort—one that causes injury to a person, one that causes injury
to property, and one that causes injury to a reputation.
The analysis of most intentional torts is straightforward and parallels the substantive crimes already
discussed in Chapter 6 "Criminal Law". When physical injury or damage to property is caused, there is
rarely debate over liability if the plaintiff deliberately undertook to produce the harm. Certain other
intentional torts are worth noting for their relevance to business.
Assault and Battery
One of the most obvious intentional torts is assault and battery. Both criminal law and tort law serve to
restrain individuals from using physical force on others. Assault is (1) the threat of immediate harm or
offense of contact or (2) any act that would arouse reasonable apprehension of imminent harm. Battery is
unauthorized and harmful or offensive physical contact with another person that causes injury.
Often an assault results in battery, but not always. In Western Union Telegraph Co. v. Hill, for example,
the defendant did not touch the plaintiff’s wife, but the case presented an issue of possible assault even
without an actual battery; the defendant employee attempted to kiss a customer across the countertop,
couldn't quite reach her, but nonetheless created actionable fear (or, as the court put it, “apprehension”)
on the part of the plaintiff's wife. It is also possible to have a battery without an assault. For example, if
someone hits you on the back of the head with an iron skillet and you didn’t see it coming, there is a
battery but no assault. Likewise, if Andrea passes out from drinking too much at the fraternity party and a
stranger (Andre) kisses her on the lips while she is passed out, she would not be aware of any threat of 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
275
offensive contact and would have no apprehension of any harm. Thus there has been no tort of assault,
but she could allege the tort of battery. (The question of what damages, if any, would be an interesting
argument.)
Under the doctrine of transferred intent, if Draco aims his wand at Harry but Harry ducks just in time and
the impact is felt by Hermione instead, English law (and American law) would transfer Draco’s intent
from the target to the actual victim of the act. Thus Hermione could sue Draco for battery for any damages
she had suffered.
False Imprisonment
The tort of false imprisonment originally implied a locking up, as in a prison, but today it can occur if a
person is restrained in a room or a car or even if his or her movements are restricted while walking down
the street. People have a right to be free to go as they please, and anyone who without cause deprives
another of personal freedom has committed a tort. Damages are allowed for time lost, discomfort and
resulting ill health, mental suffering, humiliation, loss of reputation or business, and expenses such as
attorneys’ fees incurred as a result of the restraint (such as a false arrest). But as the case of Lester v.
Albers Super Markets, Inc. (Section 7.5 "Cases") shows, the defendant must be shown to have restrained
the plaintiff in order for damages to be allowed.
Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress
Until recently, the common-law rule was that there could be no recovery for acts, even though
intentionally undertaken, that caused purely mental or emotional distress. For a case to go to the jury, the
courts required that the mental distress result from some physical injury. In recent years, many courts
have overthrown the older rule and now recognize the so-called new tort. In an employment context,
however, it is rare to find a case where a plaintiff is able to recover. The most difficult hurdle is proving
that the conduct was “extreme” or “outrageous.”
In an early California case, bill collectors came to the debtor’s home repeatedly and threatened the
debtor’s pregnant wife. Among other things, they claimed that the wife would have to deliver her child in
prison. The wife miscarried and had emotional and physical complications. The court found that the
behavior of the collection company’s two agents was sufficiently outrageous to prove the tort of 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
276
intentional infliction of emotional distress. In Roche v. Stern (New York), the famous cable television talk
show host Howard Stern had tastelessly discussed the remains of Deborah Roche, a topless dancer and
cable access television host. [1] The remains had been brought to Stern’s show by a close friend of Roche,
Chaunce Hayden, and a number of crude comments by Stern and Hayden about the remains were
videotaped and broadcast on a national cable television station. Roche’s sister and brother sued Howard
Stern and Infinity broadcasting and were able to get past the defendant’s motion to dismiss to have a jury
consider their claim.
A plaintiff’s burden in these cases is to show that the mental distress is severe. Many states require that
this distress must result in physical symptoms such as nausea, headaches, ulcers, or, as in the case of the
pregnant wife, a miscarriage. Other states have not required physical symptoms, finding that shame,
embarrassment, fear, and anger constitute severe mental distress.
Trespass and Nuisance
Trespass is intentionally going on land that belongs to someone else or putting something on someone
else’s property and refusing to remove it. This part of tort law shows how strongly the law values the rights
of property owners. The right to enjoy your property without interference from others is also found in
common law of nuisance. There are limits to property owners’ rights, however. In Katko v. Briney, for
example, the plaintiff was injured by a spring gun while trespassing on the defendant’s property. [2] The
defendant had set up No Trespassing signs after ten years of trespassing and housebreaking events, with
the loss of some household items. Windows had been broken, and there was “messing up of the property
in general.” The defendants had boarded up the windows and doors in order to stop the intrusions and
finally had set up a shotgun trap in the north bedroom of the house. One defendant had cleaned and oiled
his 20-gauge shotgun and taken it to the old house where it was secured to an iron bed with the barrel
pointed at the bedroom door. “It was rigged with wire from the doorknob to the gun’s trigger so would fire
when the door was opened.” The angle of the shotgun was adjusted to hit an intruder in the legs. The
spring could not be seen from the outside, and no warning of its presence was posted.
The plaintiff, Katko, had been hunting in the area for several years and considered the property
abandoned. He knew it had long been uninhabited. He and a friend had been to the house and found
several old bottles and fruit jars that they took and added to their collection of antiques. When they made 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
277
a second trip to the property, they entered by removing a board from a porch window. When the plaintiff
opened the north bedroom door, the shotgun went off and struck him in the right leg above the ankle
bone. Much of his leg was blown away. While Katko knew he had no right to break and enter the house
with intent to steal bottles and fruit jars, the court held that a property owner could not protect an
unoccupied boarded-up farmhouse by using a spring gun capable of inflicting death or serious injury.
In Katko, there is an intentional tort. But what if someone trespassing is injured by the negligence of the
landowner? States have differing rules about trespass and negligence. In some states, a trespasser is only
protected against the gross negligence of the landowner. In other states, trespassers may be owed the duty
of due care on the part of the landowner. The burglar who falls into a drained swimming pool, for
example, may have a case against the homeowner unless the courts or legislature of that state have made
it clear that trespassers are owed the limited duty to avoid gross negligence. Or a very small child may
wander off his own property and fall into a gravel pit on a nearby property and suffer death or serious
injury; if the pit should (in the exercise of due care) have been filled in or some barrier erected around it,
then there was negligence. But if the state law holds that the duty to trespassers is only to avoid gross
negligence, the child’s family would lose, unless the state law makes an exception for very young
trespassers. In general, guests, licensees, and invitees are owed a duty of due care; a trespasser may not be
owed such a duty, but states have different rules on this.
Intentional Interference with Contractual Relations
Tortious interference with a contract can be established by proving four elements:
1. There was a contract between the plaintiff and a third party.
2. The defendant knew of the contract.
3. The defendant improperly induced the third party to breach the contract or made performance of the
contract impossible.
4. There was injury to the plaintiff.
In a famous case of contract interference, Texaco was sued by Pennzoil for interfering with an agreement
that Pennzoil had with Getty Oil. After complicated negotiations between Pennzoil and Getty, a takeover
share price was struck, a memorandum of understanding was signed, and a press release announced the
agreement in principle between Pennzoil and Getty. Texaco’s lawyers, however, believed that Getty oil was 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
278
“still in play,” and before the lawyers for Pennzoil and Getty could complete the paperwork for their
agreement, Texaco announced it was offering Getty shareholders an additional $12.50 per share over
what Pennzoil had offered.
Texaco later increased its offer to $228 per share, and the Getty board of directors soon began dealing
with Texaco instead of Pennzoil. Pennzoil decided to sue in Texas state court for tortious interference with
a contract. After a long trial, the jury returned an enormous verdict against Texaco: $7.53 billion in actual
damages and $3 billion in punitive damages. The verdict was so large that it would have bankrupted
Texaco. Appeals from the verdict centered on an obscure rule of the Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC), Rule 10(b)-13, and Texaco’s argument was based on that rule and the fact that the contract had not
been completed. If there was no contract, Texaco could not have legally interfered with one. After the SEC
filed a brief that supported Texaco’s interpretation of the law, Texaco agreed to pay $3 billion to Pennzoil
to dismiss its claim of tortious interference with a contract.
Malicious Prosecution
Malicious prosecution is the tort of causing someone to be prosecuted for a criminal act, knowing that
there was no probable cause to believe that the plaintiff committed the crime. The plaintiff must show that
the defendant acted with malice or with some purpose other than bringing the guilty to justice. A mere
complaint to the authorities is insufficient to establish the tort, but any official proceeding will support the
claim—for example, a warrant for the plaintiff’s arrest. The criminal proceeding must terminate in the
plaintiff’s favor in order for his suit to be sustained.
A majority of US courts, though by no means all, permit a suit for wrongful civil proceedings. Civil
litigation is usually costly and burdensome, and one who forces another to defend himself against baseless
accusations should not be permitted to saddle the one he sues with the costs of defense. However,
because, as a matter of public policy, litigation is favored as the means by which legal rights can be
vindicated—indeed, the Supreme Court has even ruled that individuals have a constitutional right to
litigate—the plaintiff must meet a heavy burden in proving his case. The mere dismissal of the original
lawsuit against the plaintiff is not sufficient proof that the suit was unwarranted. The plaintiff in a suit for
wrongful civil proceedings must show that the defendant (who was the plaintiff in the original suit) filed 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
279
the action for an improper purpose and had no reasonable belief that his cause was legally or factually
well grounded.
Defamation
Defamation is injury to a person’s good name or reputation. In general, if the harm is done through the
spoken word—one person to another, by telephone, by radio, or on television—it is called slander. If the
defamatory statement is published in written form, it is called libel.
The Restatement (Second) of Torts defines a defamatory communication as one that “so tends to harm the
reputation of another as to lower him in the estimation of the community or to deter third persons from
associating or dealing with him.” [3]
A statement is not defamatory unless it is false. Truth is an absolute defense to a charge of libel or slander.
Moreover, the statement must be “published”—that is, communicated to a third person. You cannot be
libeled by one who sends you a letter full of false accusations and scurrilous statements about you unless a
third person opens it first (your roommate, perhaps). Any living person is capable of being defamed, but
the dead are not. Corporations, partnerships, and other forms of associations can also be defamed, if the
statements tend to injure their ability to do business or to garner contributions.
The statement must have reference to a particular person, but he or she need not be identified by name. A
statement that “the company president is a crook” is defamatory, as is a statement that “the major
network weathermen are imposters.” The company president and the network weathermen could show
that the words were aimed at them. But statements about large groups will not support an action for
defamation (e.g., “all doctors are butchers” is not defamatory of any particular doctor).
The law of defamation is largely built on strict liability. That a person did not intend to defame is
ordinarily no excuse; a typographical error that converts a true statement into a false one in a newspaper,
magazine, or corporate brochure can be sufficient to make out a case of libel. Even the exercise of due care
is usually no excuse if the statement is in fact communicated. Repeating a libel is itself a libel; a libel
cannot be justified by showing that you were quoting someone else. Though a plaintiff may be able to
prove that a statement was defamatory, he is not necessarily entitled to an award of damages. That is
because the law contains a number of privileges that excuse the defamation.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
280
Publishing false information about another business’s product constitutes the tort of slander of quality, or
trade libel. In some states, this is known as the tort of product disparagement. It may be difficult to
establish damages, however. A plaintiff must prove that actual damages proximately resulted from the
slander of quality and must show the extent of the economic harm as well.
Absolute Privilege
Statements made during the course of judicial proceedings are absolutely privileged, meaning that they
cannot serve as the basis for a defamation suit. Accurate accounts of judicial or other proceedings are
absolutely privileged; a newspaper, for example, may pass on the slanderous comments of a judge in
court. “Judicial” is broadly construed to include most proceedings of administrative bodies of the
government. The Constitution exempts members of Congress from suits for libel or slander for any
statements made in connection with legislative business. The courts have constructed a similar privilege
for many executive branch officials.
Qualified Privilege
Absolute privileges pertain to those in the public sector. A narrower privilege exists for private citizens. In
general, a statement that would otherwise be actionable is held to be justified if made in a reasonable
manner and for a reasonable purpose. Thus you may warn a friend to beware of dealing with a third
person, and if you had reason to believe that what you said was true, you are privileged to issue the
warning, even though false. Likewise, an employee may warn an employer about the conduct or character
of a fellow or prospective employee, and a parent may complain to a school board about the competence
or conduct of a child’s teacher. There is a line to be drawn, however, and a defendant with nothing but an
idle interest in the matter (an “officious intermeddler”) must take the risk that his information is wrong.
In 1964, the Supreme Court handed down its historic decision in New York Times v. Sullivan, holding
that under the First Amendment a libel judgment brought by a public official against a newspaper cannot
stand unless the plaintiff has shown “actual malice,” which in turn was defined as “knowledge that [the
statement] was false or with a reckless disregard of whether it was false or not.”[4] In subsequent cases, the
court extended the constitutional doctrine further, applying it not merely to government officials but
to public figures, people who voluntarily place themselves in the public eye or who involuntarily find
themselves the objects of public scrutiny. Whether a private person is or is not a public figure is a difficult 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
281
question that has so far eluded rigorous definition and has been answered only from case to case. A CEO
of a private corporation ordinarily will be considered a private figure unless he puts himself in the public
eye—for example, by starring in the company’s television commercials.
Invasion of Privacy
The right of privacy—the right “to be let alone”—did not receive judicial recognition until the twentieth
century, and its legal formulation is still evolving. In fact there is no single right of privacy. Courts and
commentators have discerned at least four different types of interests: (1) the right to control the
appropriation of your name and picture for commercial purposes, (2) the right to be free of intrusion on
your “personal space” or seclusion, (3) freedom from public disclosure of embarrassing and intimate facts
of your personal life, and (4) the right not to be presented in a “false light.”
Appropriation of Name or Likeness
The earliest privacy interest recognized by the courts was appropriation of name or likeness: someone else
placing your photograph on a billboard or cereal box as a model or using your name as endorsing a
product or in the product name. A New York statute makes it a misdemeanor to use the name, portrait, or
picture of any person for advertising purposes or for the purposes of trade (business) without first
obtaining written consent. The law also permits the aggrieved person to sue and to recover damages for
unauthorized profits and also to have the court enjoin (judicially block) any further unauthorized use of
the plaintiff’s name, likeness, or image. This is particularly useful to celebrities.
Because the publishing and advertising industries are concentrated heavily in New York, the statute plays
an important part in advertising decisions made throughout the country. Deciding what “commercial” or
“trade” purposes are is not always easy. Thus a newsmagazine may use a baseball player’s picture on its
cover without first obtaining written permission, but a chocolate manufacturer could not put the player’s
picture on a candy wrapper without consent.
Personal Space
One form of intrusion upon a person’s solitude—trespasses—has long been actionable under common law.
Physical invasion of home or other property is not a new tort. But in recent years, the notion of intrusion 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
282
has been broadened considerably. Now, taking photos of someone else with your cell phone in a locker
room could constitute invasion of the right to privacy. Reading someone else’s mail or e-mail could also
constitute an invasion of the right to privacy. Photographing someone on a city street is not tortious, but
subsequent use of the photograph could be. Whether the invasion is in a public or private space, the
amount of damages will depend on how the image or information is disclosed to others.
Public Disclosure of Embarrassing Facts
Circulations of false statements that do injury to a person are actionable under the laws of defamation.
What about true statements that might be every bit as damaging—for example, disclosure of someone’s
income tax return, revealing how much he earned? The general rule is that if the facts are truly private
and of no “legitimate” concern to the public, then their disclosure is a violation of the right to privacy. But
a person who is in the public eye cannot claim the same protection.
False Light
A final type of privacy invasion is that which paints a false picture in a publication. Though false, it might
not be libelous, since the publication need contain nothing injurious to reputation. Indeed, the publication
might even glorify the plaintiff, making him seem more heroic than he actually is. Subject to the First
Amendment requirement that the plaintiff must show intent or extreme recklessness, statements that put
a person in a false light, like a fictionalized biography, are actionable.
KEY TAKEAWAY
There are many kinds of intentional torts. Some of them involve harm to the physical person or to his
or her property, reputation or feelings, or economic interests. In each case of intentional tort, the
plaintiff must show that the defendant intended harm, but the intent to harm does not need to be
directed at a particular person and need not be malicious, as long as the resulting harm is a direct
consequence of the defendant’s actions.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
283
EXERCISES
1. Name two kinds of intentional torts that could result in damage to a business firm’s bottom line.
2. Name two kinds of intentional torts that are based on protection of a person’s property.
3. Why are intentional torts more likely to result in a verdict not only for compensatory damages but
also for punitive damages?
[1] Roche v. Stern, 675 N.Y.S.2d 133 (1998).
[2] Katko v. Briney, 183 N.W.2d 657 (Iowa 1971).
[3] Restatement (Second) of Torts, Section 559 (1965).
[4] Times v. Sullivan, 376 US 254 (1964).
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
284
7.4 Strict Liability
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Understand how strict liability torts differ from negligent torts.
2. Understand the historical origins of strict liability under common law.
3. Be able to apply strict liability concepts to liability for defective products.
4. Distinguish strict liability from absolute liability, and understand the major defenses to a lawsuit in
products-liability cases.
Historical Basis of Strict Liability: Animals and Ultra-hazardous Activities
To this point, we have considered principles of liability that in some sense depend upon the “fault” of the
tortfeasor. This fault is not synonymous with moral blame.
Aside from acts intended to harm, the fault lies in a failure to live up to a standard of reasonableness or
due care. But this is not the only basis for tort liability. Innocent mistakes can be a sufficient basis. As we
have already seen, someone who unknowingly trespasses on another’s property is liable for the damage
that he does, even if he has a reasonable belief that the land is his. And it has long been held that someone
who engages in ultra-hazardous (or sometimes, abnormally dangerous) activities is liable for damage that
he causes, even though he has taken every possible precaution to avoid harm to someone else.
Likewise, the owner of animals that escape from their pastures or homes and damage neighboring
property may be liable, even if the reason for their escape was beyond the power of the owner to stop (e.g.,
a fire started by lightning that burns open a barn door). In such cases, the courts invoke the principle of
strict liability, or, as it are sometimes called, liability without fault. The reason for the rule is explained
in Klein v. Pyrodyne Corporation (Section 7.5 "Cases").
Strict Liability for Products
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
285
Because of the importance of products liability, this text devotes an entire chapter to it (Chapter 20
"Products Liability"). Strict liability may also apply as a legal standard for products, even those that are
not ultra-hazardous. In some national legal systems, strict liability is not available as a cause of action to
plaintiffs seeking to recover a judgment of products liability against a manufacturer, wholesaler,
distributor, or retailer. (Some states limit liability to the manufacturer.) But it is available in the United
States and initially was created by a California Supreme Court decision in the 1962 case of Greenman v.
Yuba Power Products, Inc.
In Greenman, the plaintiff had used a home power saw and bench, the Shop-smith, designed and
manufactured by the defendant. He was experienced in using power tools and was injured while using the
approved lathe attachment to the Shop-smith to fashion a wooden chalice. The case was decided on the
premise that Greenman had done nothing wrong in using the machine but that the machine had a defect
that was “latent” (not easily discoverable by the consumer). Rather than decide the case based on
warranties, or requiring that Greenman prove how the defendant had been negligent, Justice Traynor
found for the plaintiff based on the overall social utility of strict liability in cases of defective products.
According to his decision, the purpose of such liability is to ensure that the “cost of injuries resulting from
defective products is borne by the manufacturers…rather than by the injured persons who are powerless
to protect themselves.”
Today, the majority of US states recognize strict liability for defective products, although some states limit
strict liability actions to damages for personal injuries rather than property damage. Injured plaintiffs
have to prove the product caused the harm but do not have to prove exactly how the manufacturer was
careless. Purchasers of the product, as well as injured guests, bystanders, and others with no direct
relationship with the product, may sue for damages caused by the product.
The Restatement of the Law of Torts, Section 402(a), was originally issued in 1964. It is a widely accepted
statement of the liabilities of sellers of goods for defective products. The Restatement specifies six
requirements, all of which must be met for a plaintiff to recover using strict liability for a product that the
plaintiff claims is defective:
1. The product must be in a defective condition when the defendant sells it.
2. The defendant must normally be engaged in the business of selling or otherwise distributing the
product.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
286
3. The product must be unreasonably dangerous to the user or consumer because of its defective
condition.
4. The plaintiff must incur physical harm to self or to property by using or consuming the product.
5. The defective condition must be the proximate cause of the injury or damage.
6. The goods must not have been substantially changed from the time the product was sold to the time
the injury was sustained.
Section 402(a) also explicitly makes clear that a defendant can be held liable even though the defendant
has exercised “all possible care.” Thus in a strict liability case, the plaintiff does not need to show “fault”
(or negligence).
For defendants, who can include manufacturers, distributors, processors, assemblers, packagers, bottlers,
retailers, and wholesalers, there are a number of defenses that are available, including assumption of risk,
product misuse and comparative negligence, commonly known dangers, and the knowledgeable-user
defense. We have already seen assumption of risk and comparative negligence in terms of negligence
actions; the application of these is similar in products-liability actions.
Under product misuse, a plaintiff who uses a product in an unexpected and unusual way will not recover
for injuries caused by such misuse. For example, suppose that someone uses a rotary lawn mower to trim
a hedge and that after twenty minutes of such use loses control because of its weight and suffers serious
cuts to his abdomen after dropping it. Here, there would be a defense of product misuse, as well as
contributory negligence. Consider the urban (or Internet) legend of Mervin Gratz, who supposedly put his
Winnebago on autopilot to go back and make coffee in the kitchen, then recovered millions after his
Winnebago turned over and he suffered serious injuries. There are multiple defenses to this alleged
action; these would include the defenses of contributory negligence, comparative negligence, and product
misuse. (There was never any such case, and certainly no such recovery; it is not known who started this
legend, or why.)
Another defense against strict liability as a cause of action is the knowledgeable user defense. If the
parents of obese teenagers bring a lawsuit against McDonald’s, claiming that its fast-food products are
defective and that McDonald’s should have warned customers of the adverse health effects of eating its
products, a defense based on the knowledgeable user is available. In one case, the court found that the
high levels of cholesterol, fat, salt, and sugar in McDonald’s food is well known to users. The court stated, 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
287
“If consumers know (or reasonably should know) the potential ill health effects of eating at McDonald’s,
they cannot blame McDonald’s if they, nonetheless, choose to satiate their appetite with a surfeit of
supersized McDonald’s products.” [1]
KEY TAKEAWAY
Common-law courts have long held that certain activities are inherently dangerous and that those who
cause damage to others by engaging in those activities will be held strictly liable. More recently, courts
in the United States have applied strict liability to defective products. Strict liability, however, is not
absolute liability, as there are many defenses available to defendants in lawsuits based on strict
liability, such as comparative negligence and product abuse.
EXERCISES
1. Someone says, “Strict liability means that you’re liable for whatever you make, no matter what the
consumer does with your product. It’s a crazy system.” Respond to and refute this statement.
2. What is the essential difference between strict liability torts and negligent torts? Should the US legal
system even allow strict liability torts? What reasons seem persuasive to you?
[1] Pellman v. McDonald’s Corp., 237 F.2d 512 (S.D.N.Y. 2003).
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
288
7.5 Cases
Intentional Torts: False Imprisonment
Lester v. Albers Super Markets, Inc.
94 Ohio App. 313, 114 N.E.2d 529 (Ohio 1952)
Facts: The plaintiff, carrying a bag of rolls purchased at another store, entered the defendant’s grocery
store to buy some canned fruit. Seeing her bus outside, she stepped out of line and put the can on the
counter. The store manager intercepted her and repeatedly demanded that she submit the bag to be
searched. Finally she acquiesced; he looked inside and said she could go. She testified that several people
witnessed the scene, which lasted about fifteen minutes, and that she was humiliated. The jury awarded
her $800. She also testified that no one laid a hand on her or made a move to restrain her from leaving by
any one of numerous exits.
* * *
MATTHEWS, JUDGE.
As we view the record, it raises the fundamental question of what is imprisonment. Before any need for a
determination of illegality arises there must be proof of imprisonment. In 35 Corpus Juris Secundum
(C.J.S.), False Imprisonment, § II, pages 512–13, it is said: “Submission to the mere verbal direction of
another, unaccompanied by force or by threats of any character, cannot constitute a false imprisonment,
and there is no false imprisonment where an employer interviewing an employee declines to terminate the
interview if no force or threat of force is used and false imprisonment may not be predicated on a person’s
unfounded belief that he was restrained.”
Many cases are cited in support of the text.
* * *
In Fenn v. Kroger Grocery & Baking Co., Mo. Sup., 209 S.W. 885, 887, the court said:
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
289
A case was not made out for false arrest. The plaintiff said she was intercepted as she started
to leave the store; that Mr. Krause stood where she could not pass him in going out. She does
not say that he made any attempt to intercept her. She says he escorted her back to the desk,
that he asked her to let him see the change.
…She does not say that she went unwillingly…Evidence is wholly lacking to show that she was
detained by force or threats. It was probably a disagreeable experience, a humiliating one to
her, but she came out victorious and was allowed to go when she desired with the assurance of
Mr. Krause that it was all right. The demurrer to the evidence on both counts was properly
sustained.
The result of the cases is epitomized in 22 Am.Jur. 368, as follows:
A customer or patron who apparently has not paid for what he has received may be detained
for a reasonable time to investigate the circumstances, but upon payment of the demand, he
has the unqualified right to leave the premises without restraint, so far as the proprietor is
concerned, and it is false imprisonment for a private individual to detain one for an
unreasonable time, or under unreasonable circumstances, for the purpose of investigating a
dispute over the payment of a bill alleged to be owed by the person detained for cash services.
* * *
For these reasons, the judgment is reversed and final judgment entered for the defendant-appellant.
CASE QUESTIONS
1. The court begins by saying what false imprisonment is not. What is the legal definition of false
imprisonment?
2. What kinds of detention are permissible for a store to use in accosting those that may have been
shoplifting?
3. Jody broke up with Jeremy and refused to talk to him. Jeremy saw Jody get into her car near the
business school and parked right behind her so she could not move. He then stood next to the driver’s
window for fifteen minutes, begging Jody to talk to him. She kept saying, “No, let me leave!” Has
Jeremy committed the tort of false imprisonment?
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
290
Negligence: Duty of Due Care
Whitlock v. University of Denver
744 P.2d 54 (Supreme Court of Colorado1987)
On June 19, 1978, at approximately 10:00 p.m., plaintiff Oscar Whitlock suffered a paralyzing injury while
attempting to complete a one-and-three-quarters front flip on a trampoline. The injury rendered him a
quadriplegic. The trampoline was owned by the Beta Theta Pi fraternity (the Beta house) and was situated
on the front yard of the fraternity premises, located on the University campus. At the time of his injury,
Whitlock was twenty years old, attended the University of Denver, and was a member of the Beta house,
where he held the office of acting house manager. The property on which the Beta house was located was
leased to the local chapter house association of the Beta Theta Pi fraternity by the defendant University of
Denver.
Whitlock had extensive experience jumping on trampolines. He began using trampolines in junior high
school and continued to do so during his brief tenure as a cadet at the United States Military Academy at
West Point, where he learned to execute the one-and-three-quarters front flip. Whitlock testified that he
utilized the trampoline at West Point every other day for a period of two months. He began jumping on
the trampoline owned by the Beta house in September of 1977. Whitlock recounted that in the fall and
spring prior to the date of his injury, he jumped on the trampoline almost daily. He testified further that
prior to the date of his injury; he had successfully executed the one-and-three-quarters front flip between
seventy-five and one hundred times.
During the evening of June 18 and early morning of June 19, 1978, Whitlock attended a party at the Beta
house, where he drank beer, vodka and scotch until 2:00 a.m. Whitlock then retired and did not awaken
until 2:00 p.m. on June 19. He testified that he jumped on the trampoline between 2:00 p.m. and 4:00
p.m., and again at 7:00 p.m. At 10:00 p.m., the time of the injury, there again was a party in progress at
the Beta house, and Whitlock was using the trampoline with only the illumination from the windows of
the fraternity house, the outside light above the front door of the house, and two street lights in the area. 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
291
As Whitlock attempted to perform the one-and-three-quarters front flip, he landed on the back of his
head, causing his neck to break.
Whitlock brought suit against the manufacturer and seller of the trampoline, the University, the Beta
Theta Pi fraternity and its local chapter, and certain individuals in their capacities as representatives of
the Beta Theta Pi organizations. Whitlock reached settlements with all of the named defendants except
the University, so only the negligence action against the University proceeded to trial. The jury returned a
verdict in favor of Whitlock, assessing his total damages at $ 7,300,000. The jury attributed twenty-eight
percent of causal negligence to the conduct of Whitlock and seventy-two percent of causal negligence to
the conduct of the University. The trial court accordingly reduced the amount of the award against the
University to $ 5,256,000.
The University moved for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, or, in the alternative, a new trial. The
trial court granted the motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, holding that as a matter of law,
no reasonable jury could have found that the University was more negligent than Whitlock, and that the
jury’s monetary award was the result of sympathy, passion or prejudice.
A panel of the court of appeals reversed…by a divided vote. Whitlock v. University of Denver, 712 P.2d
1072 (Colo. App. 1985). The court of appeals held that the University owed Whitlock a duty of due care to
remove the trampoline from the fraternity premises or to supervise its use.…The case was remanded to
the trial court with orders to reinstate the verdict and damages as determined by the jury. The University
then petitioned for certiorari review, and we granted that petition.
II.
A negligence claim must fail if based on circumstances for which the law imposes no duty of care upon the
defendant for the benefit of the plaintiff. [Citations] Therefore, if Whitlock’s judgment against the
University is to be upheld, it must first be determined that the University owed a duty of care to take
reasonable measures to protect him against the injury that he sustained.
Whether a particular defendant owes a legal duty to a particular plaintiff is a question of law. [Citations]
“The court determines, as a matter of law, the existence and scope of the duty—that is, whether the
plaintiff’s interest that has been infringed by the conduct of the defendant is entitled to legal protection.” 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
292
[Citations] In Smith v. City & County of Denver, 726 P.2d 1125 (Colo. 1986), we set forth several factors to
be considered in determining the existence of duty in a particular case:
Whether the law should impose a duty requires consideration of many factors including, for
example, the risk involved, the foreseeability and likelihood of injury as weighed against the
social utility of the actor’s conduct, the magnitude of the burden of guarding against injury or
harm, and the consequences of placing the burden upon the actor.
…A court’s conclusion that a duty does or does not exist is “an expression of the sum total of those
considerations of policy which lead the law to say that the plaintiff is [or is not] entitled to protection.”
…
We believe that the fact that the University is charged with negligent failure to act rather than negligent
affirmative action is a critical factor that strongly militates against imposition of a duty on the University
under the facts of this case. In determining whether a defendant owes a duty to a particular plaintiff, the
law has long recognized a distinction between action and a failure to act—“that is to say, between active
misconduct working positive injury to others [misfeasance] and passive inaction or a failure to take steps
to protect them from harm [nonfeasance].” W. Keeton, § 56, at 373. Liability for nonfeasance was slow to
receive recognition in the law. “The reason for the distinction may be said to lie in the fact that by
‘misfeasance’ the defendant has created a new risk of harm to the plaintiff, while by ‘nonfeasance’ he has
at least made his situation no worse, and has merely failed to benefit him by interfering in his
affairs.” Id. The Restatement (Second) of Torts § 314 (1965) summarizes the law on this point as follows:
The fact that an actor realizes or should realize that action on his part is necessary for
another’s aid or protection does not of itself impose upon him a duty to take such action.
Imposition of a duty in all such cases would simply not meet the test of fairness under contemporary
standards.
In nonfeasance cases the existence of a duty has been recognized only during the last century in situations
involving a limited group of special relationships between parties. Such special relationships are
predicated on “some definite relation between the parties, of such a character that social policy justifies
the imposition of a duty to act.” W. Keeton, § 56, at 374. Special relationships that have been recognized
by various courts for the purpose of imposition of a duty of care includes common carrier/passenger,
innkeeper/guest, possessor of land/invited entrant, employer/employee, parent/child, and 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
293
hospital/patient. See Restatement (Second) of Torts § 314 A (1965); 3 Harper and James, § 18.6, at 722–
23. The authors of the Restatement (Second) of Torts § 314 A, comment b (1965), state that “the law
appears…to be working slowly toward recognition of the duty to aid or protect in any relation of
dependence or of mutual dependence.”
…
III.
The present case involves the alleged negligent failure to act, rather than negligent action. The plaintiff
does not complain of any affirmative action taken by the University, but asserts instead that the
University owed to Whitlock the duty to assure that the fraternity’s trampoline was used only under
supervised conditions comparable to those in a gymnasium class, or in the alternative to cause the
trampoline to be removed from the front lawn of the Beta house.…If such a duty is to be recognized, it
must be grounded on a special relationship between the University and Whitlock. According to the
evidence, there are only two possible sources of a special relationship out of which such a duty could arise
in this case: the status of Whitlock as a student at the University, and the lease between the University and
the fraternity of which Whitlock was a member. We first consider the adequacy of the student-university
relationship as a possible basis for imposing a duty on the University to control or prohibit the use of the
trampoline, and then examine the provisions of the lease for that same purpose.
A.
The student-university relationship has been scrutinized in several jurisdictions, and it is generally agreed
that a university is not an insurer of its students’ safety. [Citations] The relationship between a university
and its students has experienced important change over the years. At one time, college administrators and
faculties stood in loco parentis to their students, which created a special relationship “that imposed a duty
on the college to exercise control over student conduct and, reciprocally, gave the students certain rights
of protection by the college.” Bradshaw, 612 F.2d at 139. However, in modern times there has evolved a
gradual reapportionment of responsibilities from the universities to the students, and a corresponding
departure from the in loco parentis relationship. Id. at 139–40. Today, colleges and universities are
regarded as educational institutions rather than custodial ones. Beach, 726 P.2d at 419 (contrasting
colleges and universities with elementary and high schools).
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
294
…
…By imposing a duty on the University in this case, the University would be encouraged to exercise more
control over private student recreational choices, thereby effectively taking away much of the
responsibility recently recognized in students for making their own decisions with respect to private
entertainment and personal safety. Such an allocation of responsibility would “produce a repressive and
inhospitable environment, largely inconsistent with the objectives of a modern college
education.” Beach, 726 P.2d at 419.
The evidence demonstrates that only in limited instances has the University attempted to impose
regulations or restraints on the private recreational pursuits of its students, and the students have not
looked to the University to assure the safety of their recreational choices. Nothing in the University’s
student handbook, which contains certain regulations concerning student conduct, reflects an effort by
the University to control the risk-taking decisions of its students in their private recreation…Indeed,
fraternity and sorority self-governance with minimal supervision appears to have been fostered by the
University.
…
Aside from advising the Beta house on one occasion to put the trampoline up when not in use, there is no
evidence that the University officials attempted to assert control over trampoline use by the fraternity
members. We conclude from this record that the University’s very limited actions concerning safety of
student recreation did not give Whitlock or the other members of campus fraternities or sororities any
reason to depend upon the University for evaluation of the safety of trampoline use.…Therefore, we
conclude that the student-university relationship is not a special relationship of the type giving rise to a
duty of the University to take reasonable measures to protect the members of fraternities and sororities
from risks of engaging in extra-curricular trampoline jumping.
The plaintiff asserts, however, that we should recognize a duty of the University to take affirmative action
to protect fraternity members because of the foreseeability of the injury, the extent of the risks involved in
trampoline use, the seriousness of potential injuries, and the University’s superior knowledge concerning
these matters. The argument in essence is that a duty should spring from the University’s natural interest
in the welfare and safety of its students, its superior knowledge of the nature and degree of risk involved
in trampoline use, and its knowledge of the use of trampolines on the University campus. The evidence 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
295
amply supports a conclusion that trampoline use involves risks of serious injuries and that the potential
for an injury such as that experienced by Whitlock was foreseeable. It shows further that prior injuries
resulting from trampoline accidents had been reported to campus security and to the student clinic, and
that University administrators were aware of the number and severity of trampoline injuries nationwide.
The record, however, also establishes through Whitlock’s own testimony that he was aware of the risk of
an accident and injury of the very nature that he experienced.…
We conclude that the relationship between the University and Whitlock was not one of dependence with
respect to the activities at issue here, and provides no basis for the recognition of a duty of the University
to take measures for protection of Whitlock against the injury that he suffered.
B.
We next examine the lease between the University and the fraternity to determine whether a special
relationship between the University and Whitlock can be predicated on that document. The lease was
executed in 1929, extends for a ninety-nine year term, and gives the fraternity the option to extend the
term for another ninety-nine years. The premises are to be occupied and used by the fraternity “as a
fraternity house, clubhouse, dormitory and boarding house, and generally for religious, educational, social
and fraternal purposes.” Such occupation is to be “under control of the tenant.” (emphasis added) The
annual rental at all times relevant to this case appears from the record to be one dollar. The University has
the obligation to maintain the grounds and make necessary repairs to the building, and the fraternity is to
bear the cost of such maintenance and repair.
…
We conclude that the lease, and the University’s actions pursuant to its rights under the lease, provide no
basis of dependence by the fraternity members upon which a special relationship can be found to exist
between the University and the fraternity members that would give rise to a duty upon the University to
take affirmative action to assure that recreational equipment such as a trampoline is not used under
unsafe conditions.
IV.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
296
Considering all of the factors presented, we are persuaded that under the facts of this case the University
of Denver had no duty to Whitlock to eliminate the private use of trampolines on its campus or to
supervise that use. There exists no special relationship between the parties that justifies placing a duty
upon the University to protect Whitlock from the well-known dangers of using a trampoline. Here, a
conclusion that a special relationship existed between Whitlock and the University sufficient to warrant
the imposition of liability for nonfeasance would directly contravene the competing social policy of
fostering an educational environment of student autonomy and independence.
We reverse the judgment of the court of appeals and return this case to that court with directions to
remand it to the trial court for dismissal of Whitlock’s complaint against the University.
CASE QUESTIONS
1. How are comparative negligence numbers calculated by the trial court? How can the jury say that the
university is 72 percent negligent and that Whitlock is 28 percent negligent?
2. Why is this not an assumption of risk case?
3. Is there any evidence that Whitlock was contributory negligent? If not, why would the court engage in
comparative negligence calculations?
Negligence: Proximate Cause
Palsgraf v. Long Island R.R.
248 N.Y. 339,162 N.E. 99 (N.Y. 1928)
CARDOZO, Chief Judge
Plaintiff was standing on a platform of defendant’s railroad after buying a ticket to go to Rockaway Beach.
A train stopped at the station, bound for another place. Two men ran forward to catch it. One of the men
reached the platform of the car without mishap, though the train was already moving. The other man,
carrying a package, jumped aboard the car, but seemed unsteady as if about to fall. A guard on the car,
who had held the door open, reached forward to help him in, and another guard on the platform pushed
him from behind. In this act, the package was dislodged, and fell upon the rails. It was a package of small
size, about fifteen inches long, and was covered by a newspaper. In fact it contained fireworks, but there 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
297
was nothing in its appearance to give notice of its contents. The fireworks when they fell exploded. The
shock of· the explosion threw down some scales at the other end of the platform many feet away. The
scales struck the plaintiff, causing injuries for which she sues.
The conduct of the defendant’s guard, if a wrong in its relation to the holder of the package, was not a
wrong in its relation to the plaintiff, standing far away. Relatively to her it was not negligence at all.
Nothing in the situation gave notice that the falling package had in it the potency of peril to persons thus
removed. Negligence is not actionable unless it involves the invasion of a legally protected interest, the
violation of a right. “Proof of negligence in the air, so to speak, will not do.…If no hazard was apparent to
the eye of ordinary vigilance, an act innocent and harmless, at least to outward seeming, with reference to
her, did not take to itself the quality of a tort because it happened to be a wrong, though apparently not
one involving the risk of bodily insecurity, with reference to someone else.…The plaintiff sues in her own
right for a wrong personal to her, and not as the vicarious beneficiary of a breach of duty to another.
A different conclusion will involve us, and swiftly too, in a maze of contradictions. A guard stumbles over
a package which has been left upon a platform.
It seems to be a bundle of newspapers. It turns out to be a can of dynamite. To the eye of ordinary
vigilance, the bundle is abandoned waste, which may be kicked or trod on with impunity. Is a passenger at
the other end of the platform protected by the law against the unsuspected hazard concealed beneath the
waste? If not, is the result to be any different, so far as the distant passenger is concerned, when the guard
stumbles over a valise which a truck-man or a porter has left upon the walk?…The orbit of the danger as
disclosed to the eye of reasonable vigilance would be the orbit of the duty. One who jostles one’s neighbor
in a crowd does not invade the rights of others standing at the outer fringe when the unintended contact
casts a bomb upon the ground. The wrongdoer as to them is the man who carries the bomb, not the one
who explodes it without suspicion of the danger. Life will have to be made over, and human nature
transformed, before prevision so extravagant can be accepted as the norm of conduct, the customary
standard to which behavior must conform.
The argument for the plaintiff is built upon the shifting meanings of such words as “wrong” and
“wrongful” and shares their instability. For what the plaintiff must show is a “wrong” to herself; i.e., a
violation of her own right, and not merely a “wrong” to someone else, nor conduct “wrongful” because
unsocial, but not a “wrong” to anyone. We are told that one who drives at reckless speed through a 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
298
crowded city street is guilty of a negligent act and therefore of a wrongful one, irrespective of the
consequences.
Negligent the act is, and wrongful in the sense that it is unsocial, but wrongful and unsocial in relation to
other travelers, only because the eye of vigilance perceives the risk of damage. If the same act were to be
committed on a speedway or a race course, it would lose its wrongful quality. The risk reasonably to be
perceived defines the duty to be obeyed, and risk imports relation; it is risk to another or to others within
the range of apprehension. This does not mean, of course, that one who launches a destructive force is
always relieved of liability, if the force, though known to be destructive, pursues an unexpected
path.…Some acts, such as shooting are so imminently dangerous to anyone who may come within reach of
the missile however unexpectedly, as to impose a duty of prevision not far from that of an insurer. Even
today, and much oftener in earlier stages of the law, one acts sometimes at one’s peril.…These cases aside,
wrong-is defined in terms of the natural or probable, at least when unintentional.…Negligence, like risk, is
thus a term of relation.
Negligence in the abstract, apart from things related, is surely not a tort, if indeed it is understandable at
all.…One who seeks redress at law does not make out a cause of action by showing without more that
there has been damage to his person. If the harm was not willful, he must show that the act as to him had
possibilities of danger so many and apparent as to entitle him to be protected against the doing of it
though the harm was unintended.
* * *
The judgment of the Appellate Division and that of the Trial Term should be reversed, and the complaint
dismissed, with costs in all courts.
CASE QUESTIONS
1. Is there actual cause in this case? How can you tell?
2. Why should Mrs. Palsgraf (or her insurance company) be made to pay for injuries that were caused by
the negligence of the Long Island Rail Road?
3. How is this accident not foreseeable?
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
299
Klein v. Pyrodyne Corporation
Klein v. Pyrodyne Corporation
810 P.2d 917 (Supreme Court of Washington 1991)
Pyrodyne Corporation (Pyrodyne) is a licensed fireworks display company that contracted to display
fireworks at the Western Washington State Fairgrounds in Puyallup, Washington, on July 4,1987. During
the fireworks display, one of the mortar launchers discharged a rocket on a horizontal trajectory parallel
to the earth. The rocket exploded near a crowd of onlookers, including Danny Klein. Klein’s clothing was
set on fire, and he suffered facial burns and serious injury to his eyes. Klein sued Pyrodyne for strict
liability to recover for his injuries. Pyrodyne asserted that the Chinese manufacturer of the fireworks was
negligent in producing the rocket and therefore Pyrodyne should not be held liable. The trial court applied
the doctrine of strict liability and held in favor of Klein. Pyrodyne appealed.
Section 519 of the Restatement (Second) of Torts provides that any party carrying on an “abnormally
dangerous activity” is strictly liable for ensuing damages. The public display of fireworks fits this
definition. The court stated: “Any time a person ignites rockets with the intention of sending them aloft to
explode in the presence of large crowds of people, a high risk of serious personal injury or property
damage is created. That risk arises because of the possibility that a rocket will malfunction or be
misdirected.” Pyrodyne argued that its liability was cut off by the Chinese manufacturer’s negligence. The
court rejected this argument, stating, “Even if negligence may properly be regarded as an intervening
cause, it cannot function to relieve Pyrodyne from strict liability.”
The Washington Supreme Court held that the public display of fireworks is an abnormally dangerous
activity that warrants the imposition of strict liability.
Affirmed.
CASE QUESTIONS
1. Why would certain activities be deemed ultra-hazardous or abnormally dangerous so that strict
liability is imposed?
2. If the activities are known to be abnormally dangerous, did Klein assume the risk?
3. Assume that the fireworks were negligently manufactured in China. Should Klein’s only remedy be
against the Chinese company, as Pyrodyne argues? Why or why not?
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
300
7.6 Summary and Exercises
Summary
The principles of tort law pervade modern society because they spell out the duties of care that we owe
each other in our private lives. Tort law has had a significant impact on business because modern
technology poses significant dangers and the modern market is so efficient at distributing goods to a wide
class of consumers.
Unlike criminal law, tort law does not require the tortfeasor to have a specific intent to commit the act for
which he or she will be held liable to pay damages. Negligence—that is, carelessness—is a major factor in
tort liability. In some instances, especially in cases involving injuries caused by products, a no-fault
standard called strict liability is applied.
What constitutes a legal injury depends very much on the circumstances. A person can assume a risk or
consent to the particular action, thus relieving the person doing the injury from tort liability. To be liable,
the tortfeasor must be the proximate cause of the injury, not a remote cause. On the other hand, certain
people are held to answer for the torts of another—for example, an employer is usually liable for the torts
of his employees, and a bartender might be liable for injuries caused by someone to whom he sold too
many drinks. Two types of statutes—workers’ compensation and no-fault automobile insurance—have
eliminated tort liability for certain kinds of accidents and replaced it with an immediate insurance
payment plan.
Among the torts of particular importance to the business community are wrongful death and personal
injury caused by products or acts of employees, misrepresentation, defamation, and interference with
contractual relations.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
301
EXERCISES
1. What is the difference in objectives between tort law and criminal law?
2. A woman fell ill in a store. An employee put the woman in an infirmary but provided no medical care
for six hours, and she died. The woman’s family sued the store for wrongful death. What arguments
could the store make that it was not liable? What arguments could the family make? Which seem the
stronger arguments? Why?
3. The signals on a railroad crossing are defective. Although the railroad company was notified of the
problem a month earlier, the railroad inspector has failed to come by and repair them. Seeing the allclear signal, a car drives up and stalls on the tracks as a train rounds the bend. For the past two weeks
the car had been stalling, and the driver kept putting off taking the car to the shop for a tune-up. As
the train rounds the bend, the engineer is distracted by a conductor and does not see the car until it is
too late to stop. Who is negligent? Who must bear the liability for the damage to the car and to the
train?
4. Suppose in the Katko v. Briney case (Section 7.2 "Intentional Torts") that instead of setting such a
device, the defendants had simply let the floor immediately inside the front door rot until it was so
weak that anybody who came in and took two steps straight ahead would fall through the floor and to
the cellar. Will the defendant be liable in this case? What if they invited a realtor to appraise the place
and did not warn her of the floor? Does it matter whether the injured person is a trespasser or an
invitee?
5. Plaintiff’s husband died in an accident, leaving her with several children and no money except a valid
insurance policy by which she was entitled to $5,000. Insurance Company refused to pay, delaying and
refusing payment and meanwhile “inviting” Plaintiff to accept less than $5,000, hinting that it had a
defense. Plaintiff was reduced to accepting housing and charity from relatives. She sued the insurance 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
302
company for bad-faith refusal to settle the claim and for the intentional infliction of emotional
distress. The lower court dismissed the case. Should the court of appeals allow the matter to proceed
to trial?
SELF -TEST QUESTIONS
1. Catarina falsely accuses Jeff of stealing from their employer. The statement is defamatory only
if
a. a third party hears it
b. Nick suffers severe emotional distress as a result
c. the statement is the actual and proximate cause of his distress
d. the statement is widely circulated in the local media and on Twitter
Garrett files a suit against Colossal Media Corporation for defamation. Colossal has said that
Garrett is a “sleazy, corrupt public official” (and provided some evidence to back the claim). To
win his case, Garrett will have to show that Colossal acted with
a. malice
b. ill will
c. malice aforethought
d. actual malice
Big Burger begins a rumor, using social media, that the meat in Burger World is partly
composed of ground-up worms. The rumor is not true, as Big Burger well knows. Its intent is to
get some customers to shift loyalty from Burger World to Big Burger. Burger World’s best
cause of action would be
a. trespass on the case
b. nuisance
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
303
c. product disparagement
d. intentional infliction of emotional distress
Wilfred Phelps, age 65, is driving his Nissan Altima down Main Street when he suffers the first
seizure of his life. He loses control of his vehicle and runs into three people on the sidewalk.
Which statement is true?
a. He is liable for an intentional tort.
b. He is liable for a negligent tort.
c. He is not liable for a negligent tort.
d. He is liable under strict liability, because driving a car is abnormally dangerous.
Jonathan carelessly bumps into Amanda, knocking her to the ground. He has committed the
tort of negligence
a. only if Amanda is injured
b. only if Amanda is not injured
c. whether or not Amanda is injured
SELF -TEST ANSWERS
1. a
2. d
3. c
4. c
5. a
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
304
Chapter 8
Introduction to Contract Law
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should understand the following:
1. Why and how contract law has developed
2. What a contract is
3. What topics will be discussed in the contracts chapter of this book
4. What the sources of contract law are
5. How contracts are classified (basic taxonomy)
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
305
8.1 General Perspectives on Contracts
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Explain contract law’s cultural roots: how it has evolved as capitalism has evolved.
2. Understand that contracts serve essential economic purposes.
3. Define contract.
4. Understand the basic issues in contract law.
The Role of Contracts in Modern Society
Contract is probably the most familiar legal concept in our society because it is so central to the essence of
our political, economic, and social life. In common parlance, contract is used interchangeably
with agreement, bargain, undertaking, or deal. Whatever the word, the concept it embodies is our notion
of freedom to pursue our own lives together with others. Contract is central because it is the means by
which a free society orders what would otherwise be a jostling, frenetic anarchy.
So commonplace is the concept of contract—and our freedom to make contracts with each other—that it is
difficult to imagine a time when contracts were rare, when people’s everyday associations with one
another were not freely determined. Yet in historical terms, it was not so long ago that contracts were
rare, entered into if at all by very few: that affairs should be ordered based on mutual assent was mostly
unknown. In primitive societies and in feudal Europe, relationships among people were largely fixed;
traditions spelled out duties that each person owed to family, tribe, or manor. People were born into an
ascribed position—a status (not unlike the caste system still existing in India)—and social mobility was
limited. Sir Henry Maine, a nineteenth-century British historian, wrote that “the movement of the
progressive societies has…been a movement from status to contract.” [1] This movement was not 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
306
accidental—it developed with the emerging industrial order. From the fifteenth to the nineteenth century,
England evolved into a booming mercantile economy, with flourishing trade, growing cities, an expanding
monetary system, the commercialization of agriculture, and mushrooming manufacturing. With this
evolution, contract law was created of necessity.
Contract law did not develop according to a conscious plan, however. It was a response to changing
conditions, and the judges who created it frequently resisted, preferring the imagined quieter pastoral life
of their forefathers. Not until the nineteenth century, in both the United States and England, did a fullfledged law of contracts arise together with, and help create, modern capitalism.
Modern capitalism, indeed, would not be possible without contract law. So it is that in planned
economies, like those of the former Soviet Union and pre-capitalistic China, the contract did not
determine the nature of an economic transaction. That transaction was first set forth by the state’s
planning authorities; only thereafter were the predetermined provisions set down in a written contract.
Modern capitalism has demanded new contract regimes in Russia and China; the latter adopted its
Revised Contract Law in 1999.
Contract law may be viewed economically as well as culturally. In An Economic Analysis of Law, Judge
Richard A. Posner (a former University of Chicago law professor) suggests that contract law performs
three significant economic functions. First, it helps maintain incentives for individuals to exchange goods
and services efficiently. Second, it reduces the costs of economic transactions because its very existence
means that the parties need not go to the trouble of negotiating a variety of rules and terms already
spelled out. Third, the law of contracts alerts the parties to troubles that have arisen in the past, thus
making it easier to plan the transactions more intelligently and avoid potential pitfalls.[2]
The Definition of Contract
As usual in the law, the legal definition of contract is formalistic. The Restatement (Second) of Contracts
(Section 1) says, “A contract is a promise or a set of promises for the breach of which the law gives a
remedy, or the performance of which the law in some way recognizes as a duty.” Similarly, the Uniform
Commercial Code says, “‘Contract’ means the total legal obligation which results from the parties’
agreement as affected by this Act and any other applicable rules of law.” [3] As operational definitions,
these two are circular; in effect, a contract is defined as an agreement that the law will hold the parties to.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
307
Most simply, a contract is a legally enforceable promise. This implies that not every promise or agreement
creates a binding contract; if every promise did, the simple definition set out in the preceding sentence
would read, “A contract is a promise.” But—again—a contract is not simply a promise: it is a legally
enforceable promise. The law takes into account the way in which contracts are made, by whom they are
made, and for what purposes they are made. For example, in many states, a wager is unenforceable, even
though both parties “shake” on the bet. We will explore these issues in the chapters to come.
Overview of the Contracts Chapter
Although contract law has many wrinkles and nuances, it consists of four principal inquiries, each of
which will be taken up in subsequent chapters:
1. Did the parties create a valid contract? Four elements are necessary for a valid contract:
a. Mutual assent (i.e., offer and acceptance), Chapter 9 "The Agreement"
b. Real assent (no duress, undue influence, misrepresentation, mistake, or incapacity), Chapter 10 "Real
Assent"
c. Consideration, Chapter 11 "Consideration"
d. Legality, Chapter 12 "Legality"
What does the contract mean, and is it in the proper form to carry out this meaning? Sometimes
contracts need to be in writing (or evidenced by some writing), or they can’t be enforced. Sometimes it
isn’t clear what the contract means, and a court has to figure that out. These problems are taken up in
Chapter 13 "Form and Meaning".
Do persons other than the contracting parties have rights or duties under the contract? Can the
right to receive a benefit from the contract be assigned, and can the duties be delegated so that a new
person is responsible? Can persons not a party to the contract sue to enforce its terms? These questions
are addressed in Chapter 14 "Third-Party Rights".
How do contractual duties terminate, and what remedies are available if a party has breached the
contract? These issues are taken up in Chapter 15 "Discharge of Obligations" and Chapter 16 "Remedies".
Together, the answers to these four basic inquiries determine the rights and obligations of contracting
parties.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
308
KEY TAKEAWAY
Contract law developed when the strictures of feudalism dissipated, when a person’s position in
society came to be determined by personal choice (by mutual agreement) and not by status (by how a
person was born). Capitalism and contract law have developed together, because having choices in
society means that people decide and agree to do things with and to each other, and those
agreements bind the parties; the agreements must be enforceable.
EXERCISES
1. Why is contract law necessary in a society where a person’s status is not predetermined by birth?
2. Contract law serves some economic functions. What are they?
[1] Sir Henry Maine, Ancient Law (1869), 180–82.
[2] Richard A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Law (New York: Aspen, 1973).
[3] Uniform Commercial Code; Section 1-201(11).
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
309
8.2 Sources of Contract Law
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Understand that contract law comes from two sources: judges (cases) and legislation.
2. Know what the Restatement of Contracts is.
3. Recognize the Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods.
The most important sources of contract law are state case law and state statutes (though there are also
many federal statutes governing how contracts are made by and with the federal government).
Case Law
Law made by judges is called case law. Because contract law was made up in the common-law courtroom
by individual judges as they applied rules to resolve disputes before them, it grew over time to formidable
proportions. By the early twentieth century, tens of thousands of contract disputes had been submitted to
the courts for resolution, and the published opinions, if collected in one place, would have filled dozens of
bookshelves. Clearly this mass of material was too unwieldy for efficient use. A similar problem also had
developed in the other leading branches of the common law.
Disturbed by the profusion of cases and the resulting uncertainty of the law, a group of prominent
American judges, lawyers, and law teachers founded the American Law Institute (ALI) in 1923 to attempt
to clarify, simplify, and improve the law. One of the ALI’s first projects, and ultimately one of its most
successful, was the drafting of the Restatement of the Law of Contracts, completed in 1932. A revision—
the Restatement (Second) of Contracts—was undertaken in 1964 and completed in 1979. Hereafter,
references to “the Restatement” pertain to the Restatement (Second) of Contracts.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
310
The Restatements—others exist in the fields of torts, agency, conflicts of laws, judgments, property,
restitution, security, and trusts—are detailed analyses of the decided cases in each field. These analyses
are made with an eye to discerning the various principles that have emerged from the courts, and to the
maximum extent possible, the Restatements declare the law as the courts have determined it to be. The
Restatements, guided by a reporter (the director of the project) and a staff of legal scholars, go through
several so-called tentative drafts—sometimes as many as fifteen or twenty—and are screened by various
committees within the ALI before they are eventually published as final documents.
The Restatement (Second) of Contracts won prompt respect in the courts and has been cited in
innumerable cases. The Restatements are not authoritative, in the sense that they are not actual judicial
precedents; but they are nevertheless weighty interpretive texts, and judges frequently look to them for
guidance. They are as close to “black letter” rules of law as exist anywhere in the American common-law
legal system.
Common law, case law (the terms are synonymous), governs contracts for the sale of real estate and
services. “Services” refer to acts or deeds (like plumbing, drafting documents, driving a car) as opposed to
the sale of property.
Statutory Law: The Uniform Commercial Code
Common-law contract principles govern contracts for real estate and services. Because of the historical
development of the English legal system, contracts for the sale of goods came to be governed by a different
body of legal rules. In its modern American manifestation, that body of rules is an important statute: the
Uniform Commercial Code (UCC), especially Article 2, which deals with the sale of goods.
History of the UCC
A bit of history is in order. Before the UCC was written, commercial law varied, sometimes greatly, from
state to state. This first proved a nuisance and then a serious impediment to business as the American
economy became nationwide during the twentieth century. Although there had been some uniform laws
concerned with commercial deals—including the Uniform Sales Act, first published in 1906—few were
widely adopted and none nationally. As a result, the law governing sales of goods, negotiable instruments, 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
311
warehouse receipts, securities, and other matters crucial to doing business in an industrial market
economy was a crazy quilt of untidy provisions that did not mesh well from state to state.
The UCC is a model law developed by the ALI and the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform
State Laws; it has been adopted in one form or another by the legislatures in all fifty states, the District of
Columbia, and the American territories. It is a “national” law not enacted by Congress—it is not federal
law but uniform state law.
Initial drafting of the UCC began in 1942 and was ten years in the making, involving the efforts of
hundreds of practicing lawyers, law teachers, and judges. A final draft, promulgated by the ALI, was
endorsed by the American Bar Association and published in 1951. Various revisions followed in different
states, threatening the uniformity of the UCC. The ALI responded by creating a permanent editorial board
to oversee future revisions. In one or another of its various revisions, the UCC has been adopted in whole
or in part in all American jurisdictions. The UCC is now a basic law of relevance to every business and
business lawyer in the United States, even though it is not entirely uniform because different states have
adopted it at various stages of its evolution—an evolution that continues still.
Organization of the UCC
The UCC consists of nine major substantive articles; each deals with separate though related subjects. The
articles are as follows:
• Article 1: General Provisions
• Article 2: Sales
• Article 2A: Leases
• Article 3: Commercial Paper
• Article 4: Bank Deposits and Collections
• Article 4A: Funds Transfers
• Article 5: Letters of Credit
• Article 6: Bulk Transfers
• Article 7: Warehouse Receipts, Bills of Lading, and Other Documents of Title
• Article 8: Investment Securities
• Article 9: Secured Transactions
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
312
Article 2 deals only with the sale of goods, which the UCC defines as “all things…which are movable at the
time of identification to the contract for sale other than the money in which the price is to be paid.” [1] The
only contracts and agreements covered by Article 2 are those relating to the present or future sale of
goods.
Article 2 is divided in turn into six major parts: (1) Form, Formation, and Readjustment of Contract; (2)
General Obligation and Construction of Contract; (3) Title, Creditors, and Good Faith Purchasers; (4)
Performance; (5) Breach, Repudiation, and Excuse; and (6) Remedies. These topics will be discussed in
Chapter 17 "Introduction to Sales and Leases", Chapter 18 "Title and Risk of Loss", Chapter 19
"Performance and Remedies", Chapter 20 "Products Liability", and Chapter 21 "Bailments and the
Storage, Shipment, and Leasing of Goods".
Figure 8.1 Sources of Law
International Sales Law
The Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods
A Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods (CISG) was approved in 1980 at a
diplomatic conference in Vienna. (A convention is a preliminary agreement that serves as the basis for a
formal treaty.) The CISG has been adopted by more than forty countries, including the United States.
The CISG is significant for three reasons. First, it is a uniform law governing the sale of goods—in effect,
an international Uniform Commercial Code. The major goal of the drafters was to produce a uniform law
acceptable to countries with different legal, social, and economic systems. Second, although provisions in
the CISG are generally consistent with the UCC, there are significant differences. For instance, under the
CISG, consideration (discussed in Chapter 11 "Consideration") is not required to form a contract, and 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
313
there is no Statute of Frauds (a requirement that certain contracts be evidenced by writing). Third, the
CISG represents the first attempt by the US Senate to reform the private law of business through its treaty
powers, for the CISG preempts the UCC. The CISG is not mandatory: parties to an international contract
for the sale of goods may choose to have their agreement governed by different law, perhaps the UCC, or
perhaps, say, Japanese contract law. The CISG does not apply to contracts for the sale of (1) ships or
aircraft, (2) electricity, or (3) goods bought for personal, family, or household use, nor does it apply (4)
where the party furnishing the goods does so only incidentally to the labor or services part of the contract.
KEY TAKEAWAY
Judges have made contract law over several centuries by deciding cases that create, extend, or change
the developing rules affecting contract formation, performance, and enforcement. The rules from the
cases have been abstracted and organized in the Restatements of Contracts. To facilitate interstate
commerce, contract law for many commercial transactions—especially the sale of goods—not
traditionally within the purview of judges has been developed by legal scholars and presented for the
states to adopt as the Uniform Commercial Code. There is an analogous Convention on Contracts for
the International Sale of Goods, to which the United States is a party.
EXERCISES
1. How do judges make contract law?
2. What is the Restatement of the Law of Contracts, and why was it necessary?
3. Why was the Uniform Commercial Code developed, and by whom?
4. Who adopts the UCC as governing law?
5. What is the Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods?
[1] Uniform Commercial Code, Section 2-105.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
314
8.3 Basic Taxonomy of Contracts
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Understand that contracts are classified according to the criteria of explicitness, mutuality,
enforceability, and degree of completion and that some noncontract promises are nevertheless
enforceable under the doctrine of promissory estoppel.
2. Keep your eyes (and ears) alert to the use of suffixes (word endings) in legal terminology that express
relationships between parties.
Some contracts are written, some oral; some are explicit, some not. Because contracts can be formed,
expressed, and enforced in a variety of ways, taxonomy of contracts has developed that is useful in
grouping together like legal consequences. In general, contracts are classified along four different
dimensions: explicitness, mutuality, enforceability, and degree of completion. Explicitness is the degree to
which the agreement is manifest to those not party to it. Mutuality takes into account whether promises
are given by two parties or only one. Enforceability is the degree to which a given contract is binding.
Completion considers whether the contract is yet to be performed or whether the obligations have been
fully discharged by one or both parties. We will examine each of these concepts in turn.
Explicitness
Express Contract
An express contract is one in which the terms are spelled out directly. The parties to an express contract,
whether it is written or oral, are conscious that they are making an enforceable agreement. For example,
an agreement to purchase your neighbor’s car for $5,500 and to take title next Monday is an express
contract.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
315
Implied Contract (Implied in Fact)
An implied contract is one that is inferred from the actions of the parties. When parties have not
discussed terms, an implied contract exists if it is clear from the conduct of both parties that they intended
there be one. A delicatessen patron who asks for a turkey sandwich to go has made a contract and is
obligated to pay when the sandwich is made. By ordering the food, the patron is implicitly agreeing to the
price, whether posted or not.
The distinction between express and implied contracts has received a degree of notoriety in the so-called
palimony cases, in which one member of an unmarried couple seeks a division of property after a longstanding live-together relationship has broken up. When a married couple divorces, their legal marriage
contract is dissolved, and financial rights and obligations are spelled out in a huge body of domestic
relations statutes and judicial decisions. No such laws exist for unmarried couples. However, about onethird of the states recognize common-law marriage, under which two people are deemed to be married if
they live together with the intent to be married, regardless of their failure to have obtained a license or
gone through a ceremony. Although there is no actual contract of marriage (no license), their behavior
implies that the parties intended to be treated as if they were married.
Quasi-Contract
A quasi-contract (implied in law) is—unlike both express and implied contracts, which embody an actual
agreement of the parties—an obligation said to be “imposed by law” in order to avoid unjust enrichment of
one person at the expense of another. A quasi-contract is not a contract at all; it is a fiction that the courts
created to prevent injustice. Suppose, for example, that the local lumberyard mistakenly delivers a load of
lumber to your house, where you are repairing your deck. It was a neighbor on the next block, who
ordered the lumber, but you are happy to accept the load for free; since you never talked to the
lumberyard, you figure you need not pay the bill. Although it is true there is no contract, the law implies a
contract for the value of the material: of course you will have to pay for what you got and took. The
existence of this implied contract does not depend on the intention of the parties.
Mutuality
Bilateral Contract
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
316
The typical contract is one in which the parties make mutual promises. Each is both promisor and
promisee; that is, each pledges to do something, and each is the recipient of such a pledge. This type of
contract is called a bilateral contract.
Unilateral Contract
Mutual promises are not necessary to constitute a contract. Unilateral contracts, in which one party
performs an act in exchange for the other party’s promise, are equally valid. An offer of a reward—for
catching a criminal or for returning a lost cat—is an example of a unilateral contract: there is an offer on
one side, and the other side accepts by taking the action requested.
Figure 8.2 Bilateral and Unilateral Contracts
Enforceability
Void
Not every agreement between two people is a binding contract. An agreement that is lacking one of the
legal elements of a contract is said to be avoid contract—that is, not a contract at all. An agreement that is
illegal—for example, a promise to commit a crime in return for a money payment—is void. Neither party
to a void “contract” may enforce it.
Voidable
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
317
By contrast, a voidable contract is one that may become unenforceable by one party but can be enforced
by the other. For example, a minor (any person under eighteen, in most states) may “avoid” a contract
with an adult; the adult may not enforce the contract against the minor if the minor refuses to carry out
the bargain. But the adult has no choice if the minor wishes the contract to be performed. (A contract may
be voidable by both parties if both are minors.)
Ordinarily, the parties to a voidable contract are entitled to be restored to their original condition.
Suppose you agree to buy your seventeen-year-old neighbor’s car. He delivers it to you in exchange for
your agreement to pay him next week. He has the legal right to terminate the deal and recover the car, in
which case you will of course have no obligation to pay him. If you have already paid him, he still may
legally demand a return to the status quo ante (previous state of affairs). You must return the car to him;
he must return the cash to you.
A voidable contract remains a valid contract until it is voided. Thus a contract with a minor remains in
force unless the minor decides he or she does not wish to be bound by it. When the minor reaches
majority, he or she may “ratify” the contract—that is, agree to be bound by it—in which case the contract
will no longer be voidable and will thereafter be fully enforceable.
Unenforceable
An unenforceable contract is one that some rule of law bars a court from enforcing. For example, Tom
owes Pete money, but Pete has waited too long to collect it and the statute of limitations has run out. The
contract for repayment is unenforceable and Pete is out of luck, unless Tom makes a new promise to pay
or actually pays part of the debt. (However, if Pete is holding collateral as security for the debt, he is
entitled to keep it; not all rights are extinguished because a contract is unenforceable.) A debt becomes
unenforceable, too, when the debtor declares bankruptcy.
A bit more on enforceability is in order. A promise or what seems to be a promise is usually enforceable
only if it is otherwise embedded in the elements necessary to make that promise a contract. Those
elements are mutual assent, real assent, consideration, capacity, and legality. Sometimes, though, people
say things that seem like promises, and on which another person relies. In the early twentieth century,
courts began, in some circumstances, to recognize that insisting on the existence of the traditional
elements of contract to determine whether a promise is enforceable could work an injustice where there 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
318
has been reliance. Thus developed the equitable doctrine of promissory estoppel, which has become an
important adjunct to contract law. The Restatement (Section 90) puts it this way: “A promise which the
promisor should reasonably expect to induce action or forbearance on the party of the promisee or a third
person and which does induce such action or forbearance is binding if injustice can be avoided only by
enforcement of the promise. The remedy granted for breach may be limited as justice requires.”
To be “estopped” means to be prohibited from denying now the validity of a promise you made before.
The doctrine has an interesting background. In 1937, High Trees House Ltd. (a British corporation) leased
a block of London apartments from Central London Properties. As World War II approached, vacancy
rates soared because people left the city. In 1940 the parties agreed to reduce the rent rates by half, but no
term was set for how long the reduction would last. By mid-1945, as the war was ending, occupancy was
again full, and Central London sued for the full rental rates from June on. The English court, under Judge
Alfred Thompson Denning (1899–1999), had no difficulty finding that High Trees owed the full amount
once full occupancy was again achieved, but Judge Denning went on. In an aside (called a dicta—a
statement “by the way”—that is, not necessary as part of the decision), he mused about what would have
happened if in 1945 Central London had sued for the full-occupancy rate back to 1940. Technically, the
1940 amendment to the 1937 contract was not binding on Central London—it lacked consideration—and
Central London could have reached back to demand full-rate payment. But Judge Denning said that High
Trees would certainly have relied on Central London’s promise that a reduced-rate rent would be
acceptable, and that would have been enough to bind it, to prevent it from acting inconsistently with the
promise. He wrote, “The courts have not gone so far as to give a cause of action in damages for the breach
of such a promise, but they have refused to allow the party making it to act inconsistently with it.” [1]
In the years since, though, courts have gone so far as to give a cause of action in damages for various
noncontract promises. Contract protects agreements; promissory estoppel protects reliance, and that’s a
significant difference. The law of contracts continues to evolve.
Degree of Completion
An agreement consisting of a set of promises is called an executor contract before any promises are
carried out. Most executor contracts are enforceable. If John makes an agreement to deliver wheat to
Humphrey and does so, the contract is called a partially executed contract: one side has performed, the 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
319
other has not. When John pays for the wheat, the contract is fully performed. A contract that has been
carried out fully by both parties is called an executed contract.
Terminology: Suffixes Expressing Relationships
Although not really part of the taxonomy of contracts (i.e., the orderly classification of the subject), an
aspect of contractual—indeed, legal—terminology should be highlighted here. Suffixes (the end syllables
of words) in the English language are used to express relationships between parties in legal terminology.
Here are examples:
• Offeror. One who makes an offer.
• Offeree. One to whom an offer is made.
• Promisor. One who makes a promise.
• Promisee. One to whom a promise is made.
• Obligor. One who makes and has an obligation.
• Obligee. One to whom an obligation is made.
• Transferor. One who makes a transfer.
• Transferee. One to whom a transfer is made.
KEY TAKEAWAY
Contracts are described and thus defined on the basis of four criteria: explicitness (express, implied, or
quasi-contracts), mutuality (bilateral or unilateral), and enforceability (void, voidable, unenforceable),
and degree of completion (executor, partially executed, executed). Legal terminology in English often
describes relationships between parties by the use of suffixes, to which the eye and ear must pay
attention.
EXERCISES
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
320
1. Able writes to Baker: “I will mow your lawn for $20.” If Baker accepts, is this an express or implied
contract?
2. Able telephones Baker: “I will mow your lawn for $20.” Is this an express or implied contract?
3. What is the difference between a void contract and a voidable one?
4. Carr staples this poster to a utility pole: “$50 reward for the return of my dog, Argon.” Describe this in
contractual terms regarding explicitness, mutuality, enforceability, and degree of completion.
5. Is a voidable contract always unenforceable?
6. Contractor bids on a highway construction job, incorporating Guardrail Company’s bid into its overall
bid to the state. Contractor cannot accept Guardrail’s offer until it gets the nod from the state.
Contractor gets the nod from the state, but before it can accept Guardrail’s offer, the latter revokes it.
Usually a person can revoke an offer any time before it is accepted. Can Guardrail revoke its offer in
this case?
[1] Central London Property Trust Ltd. v. High Trees House Ltd. (1947) KB 130.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
321
8.4 Cases
Explicitness: Implied Contract
Roger’s Backhoe Service, Inc. v. Nichols
681 N.W.2d 647 (Iowa 2004)
Carter, J.
Defendant, Jeffrey S. Nichols, is a funeral director in Muscatine…In early 1998 Nichols decided to build a
crematorium on the tract of land on which his funeral home was located. In working with the Small
Business Administration, he was required to provide drawings and specifications and obtain estimates for
the project. Nichols hired an architect who prepared plans and submitted them to the City of Muscatine
for approval. These plan provided that the surface water from the parking lot would drain onto the
adjacent street and alley and ultimately enter city storm sewers. These plans were approved by the city.
Nichols contracted with Roger’s [Backhoe Service, Inc.] for the demolition of the foundation of a building
that had been razed to provide room for the crematorium and removal of the concrete driveway and
sidewalk adjacent to that foundation. Roger’s completed that work and was paid in full.
After construction began, city officials came to the jobsite and informed Roger’s that the proposed
drainage of surface water onto the street and alley was unsatisfactory. The city required that an effort be
made to drain the surface water into a subterranean creek, which served as part of the city’s storm sewer
system. City officials indicated that this subterranean sewer system was about fourteen feet below the
surface of the ground.…Roger’s conveyed the city’s mandate to Nichols when he visited the jobsite that
same day.
It was Nichols’ testimony at trial that, upon receiving this information, he advised…Roger’s that he was
refusing permission to engage in the exploratory excavation that the city required. Nevertheless, it 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
322
appears without dispute that for the next three days Roger’s did engage in digging down to the
subterranean sewer system, which was located approximately twenty feet below the surface. When the
underground creek was located, city officials examined the brick walls in which it was encased and
determined that it was not feasible to penetrate those walls in order to connect the surface water drainage
with the underground creek. As a result of that conclusion, the city reversed its position and once again
gave permission to drain the surface water onto the adjacent street and alley.
[T]he invoices at issue in this litigation relate to charges that Roger’s submitted to Nichols for the three
days of excavation necessary to locate the underground sewer system and the cost for labor and materials
necessary to refill the excavation with compactable materials and attain compaction by means of a
tamping process.…The district court found that the charges submitted on the…invoices were fair and
reasonable and that they had been performed for Nichols’ benefit and with his tacit approval.…
The court of appeals…concluded that a necessary element in establishing an implied-in-fact contract is
that the services performed be beneficial to the alleged obligor. It concluded that Roger’s had failed to
show that its services benefited Nichols.…
In describing the elements of an action on an implied contract, the court of appeals stated in [Citation],
that the party seeking recovery must show:
(1) the services were carried out under such circumstances as to give the recipient reason to
understand:
(a) they were performed for him and not some other person, and
(b) they were not rendered gratuitously, but with the expectation of compensation from the
recipient; and
(2) the services were beneficial to the recipient.
In applying the italicized language in [Citation] to the present controversy, it was the conclusion of the
court of appeals that Roger’s’ services conferred no benefit on Nichols. We disagree. There was substantial
evidence in the record to support a finding that, unless and until an effort was made to locate the
subterranean sewer system, the city refused to allow the project to proceed. Consequently, it was
necessary to the successful completion of the project that the effort be made. The fact that examination of
the brick wall surrounding the underground creek indicated that it was unfeasible to use that source of
drainage does not alter the fact that the project was stalemated until drainage into the underground creek 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
323
was fully explored and rejected. The district court properly concluded that Roger’s’ services conferred a
benefit on Nichols.…
Decision of court of appeals vacated; district court judgment affirmed.
CASE QUESTIONS
1. What facts must be established by a plaintiff to show the existence of an implied contract?
2. What argument did Nichols make as to why there was no implied contract here?
3. How would the facts have to be changed to make an express contract?
Mutuality of Contract: Unilateral Contract
SouthTrust Bank v. Williams
775 So.2d 184 (Ala. 2000)
Cook, J.
SouthTrust Bank (“SouthTrust”) appeals from an order denying its motion to compel arbitration of an
action against it by checking-account customers Mark Williams and Bessie Daniels. We reverse and
remand.
Daniels and Williams began their relationship with SouthTrust in 1981 and 1995, respectively, by
executing checking-account “signature cards.” The signature card each customer signed contained a
“change-in-terms” clause. Specifically, when Daniels signed her signature card, she “agree[d] to be subject
to the Rules and Regulations as may now or hereafter be adopted by the Bank.” (Emphasis added.)…
[Later,] SouthTrust added paragraph 33 to the regulations…
ARBITRATION OF DISPUTES. You and we agree that the transactions in your account
involve ‘commerce’ under the Federal Arbitration Act (‘FAA’). ANY CONTROVERSY OR
CLAIM BETWEEN YOU AND US…WILL BE SETTLED BY BINDING ARBITRATION UNDER
THE FAA.…
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
324
This action…challenges SouthTrust’s procedures for paying overdrafts, and alleges that SouthTrust
engages in a “uniform practice of paying the largest check(s) before paying multiple smaller checks… [in
order] to generate increased service charges for [SouthTrust] at the expense of [its customers].”
SouthTrust filed a “motion to stay [the] lawsuit and to compel arbitration.” It based its motion on
paragraph 33 of the regulations. [T]he trial court…entered an order denying SouthTrust’s motion to
compel arbitration. SouthTrust appeals.…
Williams and Daniels contend that SouthTrust’s amendment to the regulations, adding paragraph 33, was
ineffective because, they say, they did not expressly assent to the amendment. In other words, they object
to submitting their claims to arbitration because, they say, when they opened their accounts, neither the
regulations nor any other relevant document contained an arbitration provision. They argue that “mere
failure to object to the addition of a material term cannot be construed as an acceptance of it.”…They
contend that SouthTrust could not unilaterally insert an arbitration clause in the regulations and make it
binding on depositors like them.
SouthTrust, however, referring to its change-of-terms clause insists that it “notified” Daniels and Williams
of the amendment in January 1997 by enclosing in each customer’s “account statement” a complete copy
of the regulations, as amended. Although it is undisputed that Daniels and Williams never affirmatively
assented to these amended regulations, SouthTrust contends that their assent was evidenced by their
failure to close their accounts after they received notice of the amendments.…Thus, the disposition of this
case turns on the legal effect of Williams and Daniels’s continued use of the accounts after the regulations
were amended.
Williams and Daniels argue that “[i]n the context of contracts between merchants [under the UCC], a
written confirmation of an acceptance may modify the contract unless it adds a material term, and
arbitration clauses are material terms.”…
Williams and Daniels concede—as they must—…that Article 2 governs “transactions in goods and,
consequently, that it is not applicable to the transactions in this case. Nevertheless, they argue:
It would be astonishing if a Court were to consider the addition of an arbitration clause a
material alteration to a contract between merchants, who by definition are sophisticated in
the trade to which the contract applies, but not hold that the addition of an arbitration clause 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
325
is a material alteration pursuant to a change-of-terms clause in a contract between one
sophisticated party, a bank, and an entire class of less sophisticated parties, its depositors.…
In response, SouthTrust states that “because of the ‘at-will’ nature of the relationship, banks by necessity
must contractually reserve the right to amend their deposit agreements from time to time.” In so stating,
SouthTrust has precisely identified the fundamental difference between the transactions here and those
transactions governed by [Article 2].
Contracts for the purchase and sale of goods are essentially bilateral and executor in nature. See
[Citation] “An agreement whereby one party promises to sell and the other promises to buy a thing at a
later time…is a bilateral promise of sale or contract to sell”.…“[A] unilateral contract results from an
exchange of a promise for an act; a bilateral contract results from an exchange of promises.”…Thus, “in a
unilateral contract, there is no bargaining process or exchange of promises by parties as in a bilateral
contract.” [Citation] “[O]nly one party makes an offer (or promise) which invites performance by another,
and performance constitutes both acceptance of that offer and consideration.” Because “a ‘unilateral
contract’ is one in which no promisor receives promise as consideration for his promise,” only one party is
bound…The difference is not one of semantics but of substance; it determines the rights and
responsibilities of the parties, including the time and the conditions under which a cause of action accrues
for a breach of the contract.
This case involves at-will, commercial relationships, based upon a series of unilateral transactions. Thus,
it is more analogous to cases involving insurance policies, such as [Citations]. The common thread
running through those cases was the amendment by one of the parties to a business relationship of a
document underlying that relationship—without the express assent of the other party—to require the
arbitration of disputes arising after the amendment.…
The parties in [the cited cases], like Williams and Daniels in this case, took no action that could be
considered inconsistent with an assent to the arbitration provision. In each case, they continued the
business relationship after the interposition of the arbitration provision. In doing so, they implicitly
assented to the addition of the arbitration provision.…
Reversed and remanded.
CASE QUESTIONS
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
326
1. Why did the plaintiffs think they should not be bound by the arbitration clause?
2. The court said this case involved a unilateral contract. What makes it that, as opposed to a bilateral
contract?
3. What should the plaintiffs have done if they didn’t like the arbitration requirement?
Unilateral Contract and At-Will Employment
Woolley v. Hoffmann-La Roche, Inc.
491 A.2d 1257 (N.J. 1985)
Wilntz, C. J.
Plaintiff, Richard Woolley, was hired by defendant, Hoffmann-La Roche, Inc., in October 1969, as an
Engineering Section Head in defendant’s Central Engineering Department at Nutley. There was no
written employment contract between plaintiff and defendant. Plaintiff began work in mid-November
1969. Sometime in December, plaintiff received and read the personnel manual on which his claims are
based.
[The company’s personnel manual had eight pages;] five of the eight pages are devoted to “termination.”
In addition to setting forth the purpose and policy of the termination section, it defines “the types of
termination” as “layoff,” “discharge due to performance,” “discharge, disciplinary,” “retirement” and
“resignation.” As one might expect, layoff is a termination caused by lack of work, retirement a
termination caused by age, resignation a termination on the initiative of the employee, and discharge due
to performance and discharge, disciplinary, are both terminations for cause. There is no category set forth
for discharge without cause. The termination section includes “Guidelines for discharge due to
performance,” consisting of a fairly detailed procedure to be used before an employee may be fired for
cause. Preceding these definitions of the five categories of termination is a section on “Policy,” the first
sentence of which provides: “It is the policy of Hoffmann-La Roche to retain to the extent consistent with
company requirements, the services of all employees who perform their duties efficiently and effectively.”
In 1976, plaintiff was promoted, and in January 1977 he was promoted again, this latter time to Group
Leader for the Civil Engineering, the Piping Design, the Plant Layout, and the Standards and Systems
Sections. In March 1978, plaintiff was directed to write a report to his supervisors about piping problems 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
327
in one of defendant’s buildings in Nutley. This report was written and submitted to plaintiff’s immediate
supervisor on April 5, 1978. On May 3, 1978, stating that the General Manager of defendant’s Corporate
Engineering Department had lost confidence in him, plaintiff’s supervisors requested his resignation.
Following this, by letter dated May 22, 1978, plaintiff was formally asked for his resignation, to be
effective July 15, 1978.
Plaintiff refused to resign. Two weeks later defendant again requested plaintiff’s resignation, and told him
he would be fired if he did not resign. Plaintiff again declined, and he was fired in July.
Plaintiff filed a complaint alleging breach of contract.…The gist of plaintiff’s breach of contract claim is
that the express and implied promises in defendant’s employment manual created a contract under which
he could not be fired at will, but rather only for cause, and then only after the procedures outlined in the
manual were followed. Plaintiff contends that he was not dismissed for good cause, and that his firing was
a breach of contract.
Defendant’s motion for summary judgment was granted by the trial court, which held that the
employment manual was not contractually binding on defendant, thus allowing defendant to terminate
plaintiff’s employment at will. The Appellate Division affirmed. We granted certification.
The employer’s contention here is that the distribution of the manual was simply an expression of the
company’s “philosophy” and therefore free of any possible contractual consequences. The former
employee claims it could reasonably be read as an explicit statement of company policies intended to be
followed by the company in the same manner as if they were expressed in an agreement signed by both
employer and employees.…
This Court has long recognized the capacity of the common law to develop and adapt to current
needs…The interests of employees, employers, and the public lead to the conclusion that the common law
of New Jersey should limit the right of an employer to fire an employee at will.
In order for an offer in the form of a promise to become enforceable, it must be accepted. Acceptance will
depend on what the promisor bargained for: he may have bargained for a return promise that, if given,
would result in a bilateral contract, both promises becoming enforceable. Or he may have bargained for
some action or non-action that, if given or withheld, would render his promise enforceable as a unilateral
contract. In most of the cases involving an employer’s personnel policy manual, the document is prepared
without any negotiations and is voluntarily distributed to the workforce by the employer. It seeks no 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
328
return promise from the employees. It is reasonable to interpret it as seeking continued work from the
employees, who, in most cases, are free to quit since they are almost always employees at will, not simply
in the sense that the employer can fire them without cause, but in the sense that they can quit without
breaching any obligation. Thus analyzed, the manual is an offer that seeks the formation of a unilateral
contract—the employees’ bargained-for action needed to make the offer binding being their continued
work when they have no obligation to continue.
The unilateral contract analysis is perfectly adequate for that employee who was aware of the manual and
who continued to work intending that continuation to be the action in exchange for the employer’s
promise; it is even more helpful in support of that conclusion if, but for the employer’s policy manual, the
employee would have quit. See generally M. Petit, “Modern Unilateral Contracts,” 63 Boston Univ. Law
Rev. 551 (1983) (judicial use of unilateral contract analysis in employment cases is widespread).
…All that this opinion requires of an employer is that it be fair. It would be unfair to allow an employer to
distribute a policy manual that makes the workforce believe that certain promises have been made and
then to allow the employer to renege on those promises. What is sought here is basic honesty: if the
employer, for whatever reason, does not want the manual to be capable of being construed by the court as
a binding contract, there are simple ways to attain that goal. All that need be done is the inclusion in a
very prominent position of an appropriate statement that there is no promise of any kind by the employer
contained in the manual; that regardless of what the manual says or provides, the employer promises
nothing and remains free to change wages and all other working conditions without having to consult
anyone and without anyone’s agreement; and that the employer continues to have the absolute power to
fire anyone with or without good cause.
Reversed and remanded for trial.
CASE QUESTIONS
1. What did Woolley do to show his acceptance of the terms of employment offered to him?
2. In part of the case not included here, the court notes that Mr. Woolley died “before oral arguments on
this case.” How can there be any damages if the plaintiff has died? Who now has any case to pursue?
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
329
3. The court here is changing the law of employment in New Jersey. It is making case law, and the rule
here articulated governs similar future cases in New Jersey. Why did the court make this change? Why
is it relevant that the court says it would be easy for an employer to avoid this problem?
8.5 Summary and Exercises
Summary
Contract law developed as the status-centered organization of feudal society faded and people began to
make choices about how they might order their lives. In the capitalistic system, people make choices about
how to interact with others, and—necessarily—those choices expressed as promises must be binding and
enforceable.
The two fundamental sources of contract law are (1) the common law as developed in the state courts and
as summarized in the Restatement (Second) of Contracts and (2) the Uniform Commercial Code for the
sale of goods. In general, the UCC is more liberal than the common law in upholding the existence of a
contract.
Types of contracts can be distinguished by four criteria: (1) express and implied, including quasi-contracts
implied by law; (2) bilateral and unilateral; (3) enforceable and unenforceable; and (4) completed
(executed) and uncompleted (executor). To understand contract law, it is necessary to master these
distinctions and their nuances.
EXERCISES
1.
a. Mr. and Mrs. Smith, an elderly couple, had no relatives. When Mrs. Smith became ill, the
Smiths asked a friend, Henrietta, to help with various housekeeping chores, including cleaning
and cooking. Although the Smiths never promised to pay her, Henrietta performed the chores 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
330
for eighteen months. Henrietta now claims that she is entitled to the reasonable value of the
services performed. Is she correct? Explain.
b. Assume instead that the Smiths asked Mrs. Smith’s sister, Caroline, who lived nearby, to help
with the housekeeping. After eighteen months, Caroline claims she is entitled to the
reasonable value of the services performed. Is she correct? Explain.
A letter from Bridge Builders Inc. to the Allied Steel Company stated, “We offer to purchase
10,000 tons of No. 4 steel pipe at today’s quoted price for delivery two months from today. Your
acceptance must be received in five days.” Does Bridge Builders intend to create a bilateral or a
unilateral contract? Why?
Roscoe’s barber persuaded him to try a new hair cream called Sansfree, which the barber applied
to Roscoe’s hair and scalp. The next morning Roscoe had a very unpleasant rash along his hairline.
Upon investigation he discovered that the rash was due to an improper chemical compound in
Sansfree. If Roscoe filed a breach of contract action against the barber, would the case be governed by
the Uniform Commercial Code or common law? Explain.
Rachel entered into a contract to purchase a 2004 Dodge from Hanna, who lived in the
neighboring apartment. When a dispute arose over the terms of the contract, Hanna argued that,
because neither she nor Rachel was a merchant, the dispute should be decided under general
principles of common law. Rachel, on the other hand, argued that Hanna was legally considered to be a
merchant because she sold the car for profit and that; consequently, the sale was governed by the
Uniform Commercial Code. Who is correct? Explain.
Lee and Michelle decided to cohabit. When they set up house, Michelle gave up her career, and
Lee promised to share his earnings with her on a fifty-fifty basis. Several years later they ended their
relationship, and when Lee failed to turn over half of his earnings, Michelle filed suit on the basis of
Lee’s promise. What kind of contract would Michelle allege that Lee had breached? Explain.
Harry and Wilma were divorced in 2008, and Harry was ordered in the divorce decree to pay his
ex-wife $10,000. In 2009 and 2010 Harry was hospitalized, incurring $3,000 in bills. He and Wilma
discussed the matter, and Wilma agreed to pay the bill with her own money, even though Harry still
owed her $5,000 from the divorce decree. When Harry died in late 2010, Wilma made a claim against
his estate for $8,000 (the $3,000 in medical bills and the $5,000 from the decree), but the estate was 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
331
only willing to pay the $5,000 from the decree, claiming she had paid the hospital bill voluntarily and
had no contract for repayment. Is the estate correct? Explain.
Louie, an adult, entered into a contract to sell a case of scotch whiskey to Leroy, a minor. Is the
contract void or voidable? Explain.
James Mann owned a manufacturing plant that assembled cell phones. A CPA audit
determined that several phones were missing. Theft by one or more of the workers was
suspected. Accordingly, under Mann’s instructions, the following sign was placed in the
employees’ cafeteria:
Reward. We are missing phones. I want all employees to watch for thievery. A reward
of $500 will be paid for information given by any employee that leads to the
apprehension of employee thieves.
—James Mann
Waldo, a plant employee, read the notice and immediately called Mann, stating, “I accept your
offer. I promise to watch other employees and provide you with the requested information.”
Has a contract been formed? Explain.
Almost every day Sally took a break at lunch and went to the International News Stand—a
magazine store—to browse the newspapers and magazines and chat with the owner, Conrad. Often
she bought a magazine. One day she went there, browsed a bit, and took a magazine off the rack.
Conrad was busy with three customers. Sally waved the magazine at Conrad and left the store with it.
What kind of a contract, if any, was created?
Joan called Devon Sand & Gravel and ordered two “boxes” (dump-truck loads) of gravel to be
spread on her rural driveway by the “shoot and run” method: the tailgate is partially opened, the
dump-truck bed is lifted, and the truck moves down the driveway spreading gravel as it goes. The
driver mistakenly graveled the driveway of Joan’s neighbor, Watson, instead of Joan’s. Is Devon
entitled to payment by Watson? Explain.
SELF -TEST QUESTIONS
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
332
1. An implied contract
a. must be in writing
b. is one in which the terms are spelled out
c. is one inferred from the actions of the parties
d. is imposed by law to avoid an unjust result
e. may be avoided by one party
The Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods is
a. an annual meeting of international commercial purchasing agents.
b. contract law used in overseas US federal territories
c. a customary format or template for drafting contracts
d. a kind of treaty setting out international contract law, to which the United States is a party
e. the organization that develops uniform international law
An unenforceable contract is
a. void, not a contract at all
b. one that a court will not enforce for either side because of a rule of law
c. unenforceable by one party but enforceable by the other
d. one that has been performed by one party but not the other
e. too indefinite to be valid
Betty Baker found a bicycle apparently abandoned near her house. She took it home and
spent $150 repairing and painting it, after which Carl appeared and proved his ownership of it.
Under what theory is Betty able to get reimbursed for her expenditures?
a. express contract
b. implied contract
c. apparent or quasi-contract
d. executor contract
e. none: she will not get reimbursed
Alice discusses with her neighbor Bob her plan to hire Woodsman to cut three trees on her
side of their property line, mentioning that she can get a good deal because Woodsman is now 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
333
between jobs. Bob says, “Oh, don’t do that. My brother is going to cut some trees on my side,
and he can do yours too for free.” Alice agrees. But Bob’s brother is preoccupied and never
does the job. Three weeks later Alice discovers Woodsman’s rates have risen prohibitively.
Under what theory does Alice have a cause of action against Bob?
a. express contract
b. promissory estoppel
c. quasi-contract
d. implied contract
e. none: she has no cause of action against Bob
SELF -TEST ANSWERS
1. c
2. d
3. c
4. c
5. b
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
334
Chapter 9
The Agreement
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should understand the following:
1. What a contract offer is, and what proposals are not offers
2. How an offer is communicated
3. How definite the offer needs to be
4. How long an offer is good for
5. How an offer is accepted, who can accept it, and when acceptance is effective
In this chapter, we begin the first of the four broad inquiries of contract law mentioned in: Did the parties
create a valid contract? The answer is not always obvious; the range of factors that must be taken into
account can be large, and their relationships subtle. Since businesspeople frequently conduct contract
negotiations without the assistance of a lawyer, it is important to attend to the nuances in order to avoid
legal trouble at the outset. Whether a contract has been formed depends in turn on whether
1. the parties reached an agreement (the focus of this chapter);
2. consideration was present;
3. the agreement was legal; and
4. the parties entered into the contract of their own free will, with knowledge of the facts, and with the
capacity to make a contract.
Factors 2, 3, and 4 are the subjects of subsequent chapters.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
335
9.1 The Agreement in General
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Recognize that not all agreements or promises are contracts.
2. Understand that whether a contract exists is based on an objective analysis of the parties’ interaction,
not on a subjective one.
The Significance of Agreement
The core of a legal contract is the agreement between the parties. This is not a necessary ingredient; in
Communist nations, contracts were (or are, in the few remaining Communist countries) routinely
negotiated between parties who had the terms imposed on them. But in the West, and especially in the
United States, agreement is of the essence. That is not merely a matter of convenience; it is at the heart of
our philosophical and psychological beliefs. As the great student of contract law Samuel Williston put it,
“It was a consequence of the emphasis laid on the ego and the individual will that the formation of a
contract should seem impossible unless the wills of the parties concurred. Accordingly we find at the end
of the eighteenth century, and the beginning of the nineteenth century, the prevalent idea that there must
be a “meeting of the minds” (a new phrase) in order to form a contract.” [1]
Although agreements may take any form, including unspoken conduct between the parties, they are
usually structured in terms of an offer and an acceptance.[2] These two components will be the focus of our
discussion. Note, however, that not every agreement, in the broadest sense of the word, need consist of an
offer and an acceptance, and that it is entirely possible, therefore, for two persons to reach agreement 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
336
without forming a contract. For example, people may agree that the weather is pleasant or that it would be
preferable to go out for Chinese food rather than to see a foreign film; in neither case has a contract been
formed. One of the major functions of the law of contracts is to sort out those agreements that are legally
binding—those that are contracts—from those that are not.
The Objective Test
In interpreting agreements, courts generally apply an objective standard (outwardly, as an observer would
interpret; not subjectively). The Restatement (Second) of Contracts defines agreement as a
“manifestation of mutual assent by two or more persons to one another.” [3] The Uniform Commercial
Code defines agreement as “the bargain of the parties in fact as found in their language or by implication
from other circumstances including course of dealing or usage of trade or course of performance.” [4] The
critical question is what the parties said or did, not what they thought they said or did, or not what
impression they thought they were making.
The distinction between objective and subjective standards crops up occasionally when one person claims
he spoke in jest. The vice president of a company that manufactured punchboards, used in gambling,
testified to the Washington State Game Commission that he would pay $100,000 to anyone who found a
“crooked board.” Barnes, a bartender, who had purchased two boards that were crooked some time
before, brought one to the company office and demanded payment. The company refused, claiming that
the statement was made in jest (the audience at the commission hearing had laughed when the offer was
made). The court disagreed, holding that it was reasonable to interpret the pledge of $100,000 as a means
of promoting punchboards:
[I]f the jest is not apparent and a reasonable hearer would believe that an offer was being
made, then the speaker risks the formation of a contract which was not intended. It is the
objective manifestations of the offeror that count and not secret, unexpressed intentions. If a
party’s words or acts, judged by a reasonable standard, manifest an intention to agree in
regard to the matter in question, that agreement is established, and it is immaterial what may
be the real but unexpressed state of the party’s mind on the subject. [5]
Lucy v. Zehmer (Section 9.4.1 "Objective Intention" at the end of the chapter) illustrates that a party’s real
state of mind must be expressed to the other party, rather than in an aside to one’s spouse.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
337
KEY TAKEAWAY
Fundamentally, a contract is a legally binding “meeting of the minds” between the parties. It is not the
unexpressed intention in the minds of the parties that determines whether there was “a meeting.” The
test is objective: how would a reasonable person interpret the interaction?
EXERCISES
1. For the purposes of determining whether a party had a contractual intention, why do courts employ
an objective rather than a subjective test?
2. What is the relationship between “the emphasis laid on the ego and the individual will” in modern
times (Williston) and the concept of the contractual agreement?
[1] Samuel Williston, “Freedom of Contract,” Cornell Law Quarterly 6 (1921), 365.
[2] Uniform Commercial Code; Section 2-204(1).
[3] Uniform Commercial Code; Section 3.
[4] Uniform Commercial Code; Section 1-201(3).
[5] Barnes v. Treece, 549 P.2d 1152 (Wash. App. 1976).
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
338
9.2 The Offer
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Know the definition of offer.
2. Recognize that some proposals are not offers.
3. Understand the three essentials of an offer: intent, communication, and definiteness.
4. Know when an offer expires and can no longer be accepted.
Offer and acceptance may seem to be straightforward concepts, as they are when two people meet face-toface. But in a commercial society, the ways of making offers and accepting them are nearly infinite. A
retail store advertises its merchandise in the newspaper. A seller makes his offer by mail or over the
Internet. A telephone caller states that his offer will stand for ten days. An offer leaves open a crucial term.
An auctioneer seeks bids. An offeror gives the offeree a choice. All these situations can raise tricky
questions, as can corresponding situations involving acceptances.
The Definition of Offer
The Restatement defines offer as “the manifestation of willingness to enter into a bargain, so made as to
justify another person in understanding that his assent to that bargain is invited and will conclude
it.” [1] Two key elements are implicit in that definition: the offer must be communicated, and it must be
definite. Before considering these requirements, we examine the threshold question of whether an offer
was intended. Let us look at proposals that may look like, but are not, offers.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
339
Proposals That Are Not Offers
Advertisements
Most advertisements, price quotations, and invitations to bid are not construed as offers. A notice in the
newspaper that a bicycle is on sale for $800 is normally intended only as an invitation to the public to
come to the store to make a purchase. Similarly, a statement that a seller can “quote” a unit price to a
prospective purchaser is not, by itself, of sufficient definiteness to constitute an offer; quantity, time of
delivery, and other important factors are missing from such a statement. Frequently, in order to avoid
construction of a statement about price and quantity as an offer, a seller or buyer may say, “Make me an
offer.” Such a statement obviously suggests that no offer has yet been made. This principle usually applies
to invitations for bids (e.g., from contractors on a building project). Many forms used by sales
representatives as contracts indicate that by signing, the customer is making an offer to be accepted by the
home office and is not accepting an offer made by the sales representative.
Although advertisements, price quotations, and the like are generally not offers, the facts in each case are
important. Under the proper circumstances, an advertised statement can be construed as an offer, as
shown in the well-known Lefkowitz case (Section 9.4.2 "Advertisements as Offers" at the end of the
chapter), in which the offended customer acted as his own lawyer and pursued an appeal to the Minnesota
Supreme Court against a Minneapolis department store that took back its advertised offer.
Despite the common-law rule that advertisements are normally to be considered invitations rather than
offers, legislation and government regulations may offer redress. For many years, retail food stores have
been subject to a rule, promulgated by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), that goods advertised as
“specials” must be available and must be sold at the price advertised. It is unlawful for a retail chain not to
have an advertised item in each of its stores and in sufficient quantity, unless the advertisement
specifically states how much is stocked and which branch stores do not carry it. Many states have enacted
consumer protection statutes that parallel the FTC rule.
Invitations to Bid
Invitations to bid are also not generally construed as offers. An auctioneer does not make offers but
solicits offers from the crowd: “May I have an offer?—$500? $450? $450! I have an offer for $450. Do I
hear $475? May I have an offer?”
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
340
Communication
A contract is an agreement in which each party assents to the terms of the other party. Without mutual
assent there cannot be a contract, and this implies that the assent each person gives must be with
reference to that of the other. If Toni places several alternative offers on the table, only one of which can
be accepted, and invites Sandy to choose, no contract is formed if Sandy says merely, “I accept your
terms.” Sandy must specify which offer she is assenting to.
From this general proposition, it follows that no contract can be legally binding unless an offer is in fact
communicated to the offeree. If you write an e-mail to a friend with an offer to sell your car for a certain
sum and then get distracted and forget to send it, no offer has been made. If your friend coincidentally emails you the following day and says that she wants to buy your car and names the same sum, no contract
has been made. Her e-mail to you is not an acceptance, since she did not know of your offer; it is, instead,
an offer or an invitation to make an offer. Nor would there have been a contract if you had sent your
communication and the two e-mails crossed in cyberspace. Both e-mails would be offers, and for a valid
contract to be formed, it would still be necessary for one of you to accept the other’s offer. An offer is not
effective until it is received by the offeree (and that’s also true of a revocation of the offer and a rejection of
the offer by the offeree).
The requirement that an offer be communicated does not mean that every term must be communicated.
You call up your friend and offer to sell him your car. You tell him the price and start to tell him that you
will throw in the snow tires but will not pay for a new inspection, and that you expect to keep the car
another three weeks. Impatiently, he cuts you off and says, “Never mind about all that; I’ll accept your
offer on whatever terms you want.” You and he have a contract.
These principles apply to unknown offers of reward. An offer of a reward constitutes a unilateral contract
that can be made binding only by performing the task for which the reward is offered. Suppose that
Bonnie posts on a tree a sign offering a reward for returning her missing dog. If you saw the sign, found
the dog, and returned it, you would have fulfilled the essentials of the offer. But if you chanced upon the
dog, read the tag around its neck, and returned it without ever having been aware that a reward was
offered, then you have not responded to the offer, even if you acted in the hope that the owner would
reward you. There is no contractual obligation.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
341
In many states, a different result follows from an offer of a reward by a governmental entity. Commonly,
local ordinances provide that a standing reward of, say, $1,000 will be paid to anyone providing
information that leads to the arrest and conviction of arsonists. To collect the reward, it is not necessary
for a person who does furnish local authorities with such information to know that a reward ordinance
exists. In contract terms, the standing reward is viewed as a means of setting a climate in which people
will be encouraged to act in certain ways in the expectation that they will earn unknown rewards. It is also
possible to view the claim to a reward as non-contractual; the right to receive it is guaranteed, instead, by
the local ordinance.
Although a completed act called for by an unknown private offer does not give rise to a contract, partial
performance usually does. Suppose Apex Bakery posts a notice offering a one-week bonus to all bakers
who work at least six months in the kitchen. Charlene works two months before discovering the notice on
the bulletin board. Her original ignorance of the offer will not defeat her claim to the bonus if she
continues working, for the offer serves as an inducement to complete the performance called for.
Definiteness
The common law reasonably requires that an offer spell out the essential proposed terms with
sufficient definiteness—certainty of terms that enables a court to order enforcement or measure damages
in the event of a breach. As it has often been put, “The law does not make contracts for the parties; it
merely enforces the duties which they have undertaken” (Simpson, 1965, p. 19). Thus a supposed promise
to sell “such coal as the promisor may wish to sell” is not an enforceable term because the seller, the coal
company, undertakes no duty to sell anything unless it wishes to do so. Essential terms certainly include
price and the work to be done. But not every omission is fatal; for example, as long as a missing term can
be fixed by referring to some external standard—such as “no later than the first frost”—the offer is
sufficiently definite.
In major business transactions involving extensive negotiations, the parties often sign a preliminary
“agreement in principle” before a detailed contract is drafted. These preliminary agreements may be
definite enough to create contract liability even though they lack many of the terms found in a typical
contract. For example, in a famous 1985 case, a Texas jury concluded that an agreement made “in
principle” between the Pennzoil Company and the Getty Oil Company and not entirely finished was 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
342
binding and that Texaco had unlawfully interfered with their contract. As a result, Texaco was held liable
for over $10 billion, which was settled for $3 billion after Texaco went into bankruptcy.
Offers that state alternatives are definitive if each alternative is definite. David offers Sheila the
opportunity to buy one of two automobiles at a fixed price, with delivery in two months and the choice of
vehicle left to David. Sheila accepts. The contract is valid. If one of the cars is destroyed in the interval
before delivery, David is obligated to deliver the other car. Sometimes, however, what appears to be an
offer in the alternative may be something else. Charles makes a deal to sell his business to Bernie. As part
of the bargain, Charles agrees not to compete with Bernie for the next two years, and if he does, to pay
$25,000. Whether this is an alternative contract depends on the circumstances and intentions of the
parties. If it is, then Charles is free to compete as long as he pays Bernie $25,000. On the other hand, the
intention might have been to prevent Charles from competing in any event; hence a court could order
payment of the $25,000 as damages for a breach and still order Charles to refrain from competition until
the expiration of the two-year period.
The UCC Approach
The Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) is generally more liberal in its approach to definiteness than is the
common law—at least as the common law was interpreted in the heyday of classical contract doctrine.
Section 2-204(3) states the rule: “Even though one or more terms are left open, a contract for sale does
not fail for indefiniteness if the parties have intended to make a contract and there is a reasonably certain
basis for giving an appropriate remedy.”
The drafters of the UCC sought to give validity to as many contracts as possible and grounded that validity
on the intention of the parties rather than on formalistic requirements. As the official comment to Section
2-204(3) notes, “If the parties intend to enter into a binding agreement, this subsection recognizes that
agreement as valid in law, despite missing terms, if there is any reasonably certain basis for granting a
remedy.…Commercial standards on the point of ‘indefiniteness’ are intended to be applied.” Other
sections of the UCC spell out rules for filling in such open provisions as price, performance, and
remedies. [2]
One of these sections, Section 2-306(1), provides that a contract term under which a buyer agrees to
purchase the seller’s entire output of goods (an “outputs contract”) or a seller agrees to meet all the 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
343
buyer’s requirements (a “requirements” or “needs” contract) means output or requirements that occur in
good faith. A party to such a contract cannot offer or demand a quantity that is “unreasonably
disproportionate” to a stated estimate or past quantities.
Duration of Offer
An offer need not be accepted on the spot. Because there are numerous ways of conveying an offer and
numerous contingencies that may be part of the offer’s subject matter, the offeror might find it necessary
to give the offeree considerable time to accept or reject the offer. By the same token, an offer cannot
remain open forever, so that once given, it never lapses and cannot be terminated. The law recognizes
seven ways by which the offer can expire (besides acceptance, of course): revocation, rejection by the
offeree, counteroffer, acceptance with counteroffer, lapse of time, death or insanity of a person or
destruction of an essential term, and illegality. We will examine each of these in turn.
Revocation
People are free to make contracts and, in general, to revoke them.
Revocability
The general rule, both in common law and under the UCC, is that the offeror may revoke his or her offer
at any time before acceptance, even if the offer states that it will remain open for a specified period of
time. Neil offers Arlene his car for $5,000 and promises to keep the offer open for ten days. Two days
later, Neil calls Arlene to revoke the offer. The offer is terminated, and Arlene’s acceptance thereafter,
though within the ten days, is ineffective. But if Neil had sent his revocation (the taking back of an offer
before it is accepted) by mail, and if Arlene, before she received it, had telephoned her acceptance, there
would be a contract, since revocation is effective only when the offeree actually receives it. There is an
exception to this rule for offers made to the public through newspaper or like advertisements. The offeror
may revoke a public offering by notifying the public by the same means used to communicate the offer. If
no better means of notification is reasonably available, the offer is terminated even if a particular offeree
had no actual notice.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
344
Revocation may be communicated indirectly. If Arlene had learned from a friend that Neil had sold his car
to someone else during the ten-day period, she would have had sufficient notice. Any attempt to accept
Neil’s offer would have been futile.
Irrevocable Offers
Not every type of offer is revocable. One type of offer that cannot be revoked is the option contract (the
promisor explicitly agrees for consideration to limit his right to revoke). Arlene tells Neil that she cannot
make up her mind in ten days but that she will pay him $25 to hold the offer open for thirty days. Neil
agrees. Arlene has an option to buy the car for $5,000; if Neil should sell it to someone else during the
thirty days, he will have breached the contract with Arlene. Note that the transactions involving Neil and
Arlene consist of two different contracts. One is the promise of a thirty-day option for the promise of $25.
It is this contract that makes the option binding and is independent of the original offer to sell the car for
$5,000. The offer can be accepted and made part of an independent contract during the option period.
Partial performance of a unilateral contract creates an option. Although the option is not stated explicitly,
it is recognized by law in the interests of justice. Otherwise, an offeror could induce the offeree to go to
expense and trouble without ever being liable to fulfill his or her part of the bargain. Before the offeree
begins to carry out the contract, the offeror is free to revoke the offer. But once performance begins, the
law implies an option, allowing the offeree to complete performance according to the terms of the offer. If,
after a reasonable time, the offeree does not fulfill the terms of the offer, then it may be revoked.
Revocability under the UCC
The UCC changes the common-law rule for offers by merchants. Under Section 2-205, a firm offers (a
written and signed promise by a merchant to hold an offer to buy or sell goods for some period of time) is
irrevocable. That is, an option is created, but no consideration is required. The offer must remain open for
the time period stated or, if no time period is given, for a reasonable period of time, which may not exceed
three months.
Irrevocability by Law
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
345
By law, certain types of offers may not be revoked (statutory irrevocability), despite the absence of
language to that effect in the offer itself. One major category of such offers is that of the contractor
submitting a bid to a public agency. The general rule is that once the period of bidding opens, a bidder on
a public contract may not withdraw his or her bid unless the contracting authority consents. The
contractor who purports to withdraw is awarded the contract based on the original bid and may be sued
for damages for nonperformance.
Rejection by the Offeree
Rejection (a manifestation of refusal to agree to the terms of an offer) of the offer is effective when the
offeror receives it. A subsequent change of mind by the offeree cannot revive the offer. Donna calls Chuck
to reject Chuck’s offer to sell his lawn mower. Chuck is then free to sell it to someone else. If Donna
changes her mind and calls Chuck back to accept after all, there still is no contract, even if Chuck has
made no further effort to sell the lawn mower. Having rejected the original offer, Donna, by her second
call, is not accepting but making an offer to buy. Suppose Donna had written Chuck to reject, but on
changing her mind, decided to call to accept before the rejection letter arrived. In that case, the offer
would have been accepted.
Counteroffer
A counteroffer, a response that varies the terms of an offer, is a rejection. Jones offers Smith a small
parcel of land for $10,000 and says the offer will remain open for one month. Smith responds ten days
later, saying he will pay $5,000. Jones’s original offer has thereby been rejected. If Jones now declines
Smith’s counteroffer, may Smith bind Jones to his original offer by agreeing to pay the full $10,000? He
may not, because once an original offer is rejected, all the terms lapse. However, an inquiry by Smith as to
whether Jones would consider taking less is not a counteroffer and would not terminate the offer.
Acceptance with Counteroffer
This is not really an acceptance at all but is a counteroffer: an acceptance that changes the terms of the
offer is a counteroffer and terminates the offer. The common law imposes a mirror image rule: the
acceptance must match the offer in all its particulars or the offer is rejected. However, if an acceptance 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
346
that requests a change or an addition to the offer does not require the offeror’s assent, then the acceptance
is valid. The broker at Friendly Real Estate offers you a house for $320,000. You accept but include in
your acceptance “the vacant lot next door.” Your acceptance is a counteroffer, which serves to terminate
the original offer. If, instead, you had said, “It’s a deal, but I’d prefer it with the vacant lot next door,” then
there is a contract because you are not demanding that the broker abide by your request. If you had said,
“It’s a deal, and I’d also like the vacant lot next door,” you have a contract, because the request for the lot
is a separate offer, not a counteroffer rejecting the original proposal.
The UCC and Counteroffers
The UCC is more liberal than the common law in allowing contracts to be formed despite counteroffers
and in incorporating the counteroffers into the contracts. This UCC provision is necessary because the use
of routine forms for contracts is very common, and if the rule were otherwise, much valuable time would
be wasted by drafting clauses tailored to the precise wording of the routine printed forms. A buyer and a
seller send out documents accompanying or incorporating their offers and acceptances, and the
provisions in each document rarely correspond precisely. Indeed, it is often the case that one side’s form
contains terms favorable to it but inconsistent with terms on the other side’s form. Section 2-207 of the
UCC attempts to resolve this “battle of the forms” by providing that additional terms or conditions in an
acceptance operate as such unless the acceptance is conditioned on the offeror’s consent to the new or
different terms. The new terms are construed as offers but are automatically incorporated in any contract
between merchants for the sale of goods unless “(a) the offer expressly limits acceptance to the terms of
the offer; (b) [the terms] materially alter it; or (c) notification of objection to them has already been given
or is given within a reasonable time after notice of them is received.”
An example of terms that become part of the contract without being expressly agreed to are clauses
providing for interest payments on overdue bills. Examples of terms that would materially alter the
contract and hence need express approval are clauses that negate the standard warranties that sellers give
buyers on their merchandise.
Frequently, parties use contract provisions to prevent the automatic introduction of new terms. A typical
seller’s provision is as follows:
Amendments
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
347
Any modification of this document by the Buyer, and all additional or different terms included
in Buyer’s purchase order or any other document responding to this offer, are hereby objected
to. BY ORDERING THE GOODS HERE FOR SHIPMENT, BUYER AGREES TO ALL THE
TERMS AND CONDITIONS CONTAINED ON BOTH SIDES OF THIS DOCUMENT.
Section 2-207 of the UCC, liberalizing the mirror image rule, is pervasive, covering all sorts of contracts,
from those between industrial manufacturers to those between friends.
Lapse of Time
Offers are not open-ended; they lapse after some period of time. An offer may contain its own specific
time limitation—for example, “until close of business today.”
In the absence of an expressly stated time limit, the common-law rule is that the offer expires at the end of
a “reasonable” time. Such a period is a factual question in each case and depends on the particular
circumstances, including the nature of the service or property being contracted for, the manner in which
the offer is made, and the means by which the acceptance is expected to be made. Whenever the contract
involves a speculative transaction—the sale of securities or land, for instance—the time period will depend
on the nature of the security and the risk involved. In general, the greater the risk to the seller, the shorter
the period of time. Karen offers to sell Gary a block of oil stocks that are fluctuating rapidly hour by hour.
Gary receives the offer an hour before the market closes; he accepts by fax two hours after the market has
opened the next morning and after learning that the stock has jumped up significantly. The time period
has lapsed if Gary was accepting a fixed price that Karen set, but it may still be open if the price is market
price at time of delivery. (Under Section 41 of the Restatement, an offer made by mail is “seasonably
accepted if an acceptance is mailed at any time before midnight on the day on which the offer is
received.”)
For unilateral contracts, both the common law and the UCC require the offeree to notify the offeror that
he has begun to perform the terms of the contract. Without notification, the offeror may, after a
reasonable time, treat the offer as having lapsed.
Death or Insanity of the Offeror
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
348
The death or insanity of the offeror prior to acceptance terminates the offer; the offer is said to die with
the offeror. (Notice, however, that the death of a party to a contract does not necessarily terminate the
contract: the estate of a deceased person may be liable on a contract made by the person before death.)
Destruction of Subject Matter Essential to the Offer
Destruction of something essential to the contract also terminates the offer. You offer to sell your car, but
the car is destroyed in an accident before your offer is accepted; the offer is terminated.
Post-offer Illegality
A statute making unlawful the object of the contract will terminate the offer if the statute takes effect after
the offer was made. Thus an offer to sell a quantity of herbal weight-loss supplements will terminate if the
Food and Drug Administration outlaws the sale of such supplements.
KEY TAKEAWAY
An offer is a manifestation of willingness to enter into a contract, effective when received. It must be
communicated to the offeree, be made intentionally (according to an objective standard), and be
definite enough to determine a remedy in case of breach. An offer terminates in one of seven ways:
revocation before acceptance (except for option contracts, firm offers under the UCC, statutory
irrevocability, and unilateral offers where an offeree has commenced performance); rejection;
counteroffer; acceptance with counteroffer; lapse of time (as stipulated or after a reasonable time);
death or insanity of the offeror before acceptance or destruction of subject matter essential to the
offer; and post-offer illegality.
EXERCISES
1. Why is it said an offer is a “manifestation” of willingness to enter into a contract? How could
willingness be “manifested”?
2. Which kind of standard is used to determine whether a person has made an offer—subjective or
objective?
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
349
3. If Sandra posts a written notice offering “to the kitchen staff at Coldwater Bay (Alaska) transportation
to Seattle at the end of the fishing season,” and if David, one of the maintenance workers, says to her,
“I accept your offer of transportation to Seattle,” is there a contract?
4. What are the seven ways an offer can terminate?
[1] Restatement (Second) of Contracts, Section 24.
[2] Chiefly, Uniform Commercial Code, Sections 2-305 through 2-310.
9.3 The Acceptance
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Define acceptance.
2. Understand who may accept an offer.
3. Know when the acceptance is effective.
4. Recognize when silence is acceptance.
General Definition of Acceptance
To result in a legally binding contract, an offer must be accepted by the offeree. Just as the law helps
define and shape an offer and its duration, so the law governs the nature and manner of acceptance. The
Restatement defines acceptance of an offer as “a manifestation of assent to the terms thereof made by the
offeree in a manner invited or required by the offer.” [1]The assent may be either by the making of a mutual
promise or by performance or partial performance. If there is doubt about whether the offer requests a
return promise or a return act, the Restatement, Section 32, provides that the offeree may accept with
either a promise or performance. The Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) also adopts this view; under
Section 2-206(1)(a), “an offer to make a contract shall be construed as inviting acceptance in any manner
and by any medium reasonable in the circumstances” unless the offer unambiguously requires a certain
mode of acceptance.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
350
Who May Accept?
The identity of the offeree is usually clear, even if the name is unknown. The person to whom a promise is
made is ordinarily the person whom the offeror contemplates will make a return promise or perform the
act requested. But this is not invariably so. A promise can be made to one person who is not expected to
do anything in return. The consideration necessary to weld the offer and acceptance into a legal contract
can be given by a third party. Under the common law, whoever is invited to furnish consideration to the
offeror is the offeree, and only an offeree may accept an offer. A common example is sale to a minor.
George promises to sell his automobile to Bartley, age seventeen, if Bartley’s father will promise to pay
$3,500 to George. Bartley is the promisee (the person to whom the promise is made) but not the offeree;
Bartley cannot legally accept George’s offer. Only Bartley’s father, who is called on to pay for the car, can
accept, by making the promise requested. And notice what might seem obvious: a promise to perform as
requested in the offer is itself a binding acceptance.
When Is Acceptance Effective?
As noted previously, an offer, a revocation of the offer, and a rejection of the offer are not effective until
received. The same rule does not always apply to the acceptance.
Instantaneous Communication
Of course, in many instances the moment of acceptance is not in question: in face-to-face deals or
transactions negotiated by telephone, the parties extend an offer and accept it instantaneously during the
course of the conversation. But problems can arise in contracts negotiated through correspondence.
Stipulations as to Acceptance
One common situation arises when the offeror stipulates the mode of acceptance (e.g., return mail, fax, or
carrier pigeon). If the offeree uses the stipulated mode, then the acceptance is deemed effective when sent.
Even though the offeror has no knowledge of the acceptance at that moment, the contract has been
formed. Moreover, according to the Restatement, Section 60, if the offeror says that the offer can be
accepted only by the specified mode, that mode must be used. (It is said that “the offeror is the master of
the offer.”)
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
351
If the offeror specifies no particular mode, then acceptance is effective when transmitted, as long as the
offeree uses a reasonable method of acceptance. It is implied that the offeree can use the same means used
by the offeror or a means of communication customary to the industry.
The “Mailbox Rule”
The use of the postal service is customary, so acceptances are considered effective when mailed,
regardless of the method used to transmit the offer. Indeed, the so-called mailbox rule has a lineage
tracing back more than one hundred years to the English courts. [2]
The mailbox rule may seem to create particular difficulties for people in business, since the acceptance is
effective even though the offeror is unaware of the acceptance, and even if the letter is lost and never
arrives. But the solution is the same as the rationale for the rule. In contracts negotiated through
correspondence, there will always be a burden on one of the parties. If the rule were that the acceptance is
not effective until received by the offeror, then the offeree would be on tenterhooks, rather than the other
way around, as is the case with the present rule. As between the two, it seems fairer to place the burden on
the offeror, since he or she alone has the power to fix the moment of effectiveness. All the offeror need do
is specifying in the offer that acceptance is not effective until received.
In all other cases—that is, when the offeror fails to specify the mode of acceptance and the offeree uses a
mode that is not reasonable—acceptance is deemed effective only when received.
Acceptance “Outruns” Rejection
When the offeree sends a rejection first and then later transmits a superseding acceptance, the “effective
when received” rule also applies. Suppose a seller offers buyer two cords of firewood and says the offer
will remain open for a week. On the third day, the buyer writes the seller, rejecting the offer. The following
evening, the buyer rethinks his firewood needs, and on the morning of the fifth day, he sends an e-mail
accepting the seller’s terms. The previously mailed letter arrives the following day. Since the letter had not
yet been received, the offer had not been rejected. For there to be a valid contract, the e-mailed acceptance
must arrive before the mailed rejection. If the e-mail were hung up in cyberspace, although through no
fault of the buyer, so that the letter arrived first, the seller would be correct in assuming the offer was 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
352
terminated—even if the e-mail arrived a minute later. In short, where “the acceptance outruns the
rejection” the acceptance is effective. See Figure 9.1.
Figure 9.1
When Is Communication Effective?
Electronic Communications
Electronic communications have, of course, become increasingly common. Many contracts are negotiated
by e-mail, accepted and “signed” electronically. Generally speaking, this does not change the rules. The
Uniform Electronic Transactions Act (UETA) was promulgated (i.e., disseminated for states to adopt) in
1999. It is one of a number of uniform acts, like the Uniform Commercial Code. As of June 2010, fortyseven states and the US Virgin Islands had adopted the statute. The introduction to the act provides that
“the purpose of the UETA is to remove barriers to electronic commerce by validating and effectuating
electronic records and signatures.” [3] In general, the UETA provides the following:
a. A record or signature may not be denied legal effect or enforceability solely because it is in
electronic form.
b. A contract may not be denied legal effect or enforceability solely because an electronic record was
used in its formation.
c. If a law requires a record to be in writing, an electronic record satisfies the law.
d. If a law requires a signature, an electronic signature satisfies the law.
The UETA, though, doesn’t address all the problems with electronic contracting. Clicking on a computer
screen may constitute a valid acceptance of a contractual offer, but only if the offer is clearly
communicated. In Specht v. Netscape Communications Corp., customers who had downloaded a free
online computer program complained that it effectively invaded their privacy by inserting into their
machines “cookies”; they wanted to sue, but the defendant said they were bound to arbitration. [4] They
had clicked on the Download button, but hidden below it were the licensing terms, including the 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
353
arbitration clause. The federal court of appeals held that there was no valid acceptance. The court said,
“We agree with the district court that a reasonably prudent Internet user in circumstances such as these
would not have known or learned of the existence of the license terms before responding to defendants’
invitation to download the free software, and that defendants therefore did not provide reasonable notice
of the license terms. In consequence, the plaintiffs’ bare act of downloading the software did not
unambiguously manifest assent to the arbitration provision contained in the license terms.”
If a faxed document is sent but for some reason not received or not noticed, the emerging law is that the
mailbox rule does not apply. A court would examine the circumstances with care to determine the reason
for the non-receipt or for the offeror’s failure to notice its receipt. A person has to have fair notice that his
or her offer has been accepted, and modern communication makes the old-fashioned mailbox rule—that
acceptance is effective upon dispatch—problematic. [5]
Silence as Acceptance
General Rule: Silence Is Not Acceptance
Ordinarily, for there to be a contract, the offeree must make some positive manifestation of assent to the
offeror’s terms. The offeror cannot usually word his offer in such a way that the offeree’s failure to
respond can be construed as an acceptance.
Exceptions
The Restatement, Section 69, gives three situations, however, in which silence can operate as an
acceptance. The first occurs when the offeree avails himself of services proffered by the offeror, even
though he could have rejected them and had reason to know that the offeror offered them expecting
compensation. The second situation occurs when the offer states that the offeree may accept without
responding and the offeree, remaining silent, intends to accept. The third situation is that of previous
dealings, in which only if the offeree intends not to accept is it reasonable to expect him to say so.
As an example of the first type of acceptance by silence, assume that a carpenter happens by your house
and sees a collapsing porch. He spots you in the front yard and points out the deterioration. “I’m a
professional carpenter,” he says, “and between jobs. I can fix that porch for you. Somebody ought to.” You 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
354
say nothing. He goes to work. There is an implied contract, with the work to be done for the carpenter’s
usual fee.
To illustrate the second situation, suppose that a friend has left her car in your garage. The friend sends
you a letter in which she offers you the car for $4,000 and adds, “If I don’t hear from you, I will assume
that you have accepted my offer.” If you make no reply, with the intention of accepting the offer, a
contract has been formed.
The third situation is illustrated by Section 9.4.3 "Silence as Acceptance", a well-known decision made by
Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. when he was sitting on the Supreme Court of Massachusetts.
KEY TAKEAWAY
Without an acceptance of an offer, no contract exists, and once an acceptance is made, a contract is
formed. If the offeror stipulates how the offer should be accepted, so be it. If there is no stipulation, any
reasonable means of communication is good. Offers and revocations are usually effective upon receipt,
while an acceptance is effective on dispatch. The advent of electronic contracting has caused some
modification of the rules: courts are likely to investigate the facts surrounding the exchange of offer and
acceptance more carefully than previously. But the nuances arising because of the mailbox rule and
acceptance by silence still require close attention to the facts.
EXERCISES
1. Rudy puts this poster, with a photo of his dog, on utility poles around his neighborhood: “$50 reward for
the return of my lost dog.” Carlene doesn’t see the poster, but she finds the dog and, after looking at the
tag on its collar, returns the dog to Rudy. As she leaves his house, her eye falls on one of the posters, but
Rudy declines to pay her anything. Why is Rudy correct that Carlene has no legal right to the reward?
2. How has the UCC changed the common law’s mirror image rule, and why?
3. When is an offer generally said to be effective? A rejection of an offer? A counteroffer?
4. How have modern electronic communications affected the law of offer and acceptance?
5. When silence is considered an acceptance?
[1] Restatement (Second) of Contracts, Section 24.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
355
[2] Adams v. Lindsell, 1 Barnewall & Alderson 681 (K.B. 1818).
[3] The National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws, Uniform Electronic Transactions Act
(1999) (Denver: National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws, 1999), accessed March 29,
2011,http://www.law.upenn.edu/bll/archives/ulc/fnact99/1990s/ueta99.pdf.
[4] Specht v. Netscape Communications Corp., 306 F.3d 17 (2d Cir. 2002).
[5] See, for example, Clow Water Systems Co. v. National Labor Relations Board, 92 F.3d 441 (6th Cir. 1996).
9.4 Cases
Objective Intention
Lucy v. Zehmer
84 S.E.2d 516 (Va. 1954)
Buchanan, J.
This suit was instituted by W. O. Lucy and J. C. Lucy, complainants, against A. H. Zehmer and Ida S.
Zehmer, his wife, defendants, to have specific performance of a contract by which it was alleged the
Zehmers had sold to W. O. Lucy a tract of land owned by A. H. Zehmer in Dinwiddie county containing
471.6 acres, more or less, known as the Ferguson farm, for $50,000. J. C. Lucy, the other complainant, is
a brother of W. O. Lucy, to whom W. O. Lucy transferred a half interest in his alleged purchase.
The instrument sought to be enforced was written by A. H. Zehmer on December 20, 1952, in these words:
“We hereby agree to sell to W. O. Lucy the Ferguson farm complete for $50,000.00, title satisfactory to
buyer,” and signed by the defendants, A. H. Zehmer and Ida S. Zehmer.
The answer of A. H. Zehmer admitted that at the time mentioned W. O. Lucy offered him $50,000 cash
for the farm, but that he, Zehmer, considered that the offer was made in jest; that so thinking, and both he
and Lucy having had several drinks, he wrote out “the memorandum” quoted above and induced his wife
to sign it; that he did not deliver the memorandum to Lucy, but that Lucy picked it up, read it, put it in his
pocket, attempted to offer Zehmer $5 to bind the bargain, which Zehmer refused to accept, and realizing 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
356
for the first time that Lucy was serious, Zehmer assured him that he had no intention of selling the farm
and that the whole matter was a joke. Lucy left the premises insisting that he had purchased the farm.…
In his testimony Zehmer claimed that he “was high as a Georgia pine,” and that the transaction “was just a
bunch of two doggoned drunks bluffing to see who could talk the biggest and say the most.” That claim is
inconsistent with his attempt to testify in great detail as to what was said and what was done.…
If it be assumed, contrary to what we think the evidence shows, that Zehmer was jesting about selling his
farm to Lucy and that the transaction was intended by him to be a joke, nevertheless the evidence shows
that Lucy did not so understand it but considered it to be a serious business transaction and the contract
to be binding on the Zehmers as well as on himself. The very next day he arranged with his brother to put
up half the money and take a half interest in the land. The day after that he employed an attorney to
examine the title. The next night, Tuesday, he was back at Zehmer’s place and there Zehmer told him for
the first time, Lucy said, that he wasn’t going to sell and he told Zehmer, “You know you sold that place
fair and square.” After receiving the report from his attorney that the title was good he wrote to Zehmer
that he was ready to close the deal.
Not only did Lucy actually believe, but the evidence shows he was warranted in believing, that the contract
represented a serious business transaction and a good faith sale and purchase of the farm.
In the field of contracts, as generally elsewhere, “We must look to the outward expression of a person as
manifesting his intention rather than to his secret and unexpressed intention. The law imputes to a person
an intention corresponding to the reasonable meaning of his words and acts.”
At no time prior to the execution of the contract had Zehmer indicated to Lucy by word or act that he was
not in earnest about selling the farm. They had argued about it and discussed its terms, as Zehmer
admitted, for a long time. Lucy testified that if there was any jesting it was about paying $50,000 that
night. The contract and the evidence show that he was not expected to pay the money that night. Zehmer
said that after the writing was signed he laid it down on the counter in front of Lucy. Lucy said Zehmer
handed it to him. In any event there had been what appeared to be a good faith offer and a good faith
acceptance, followed by the execution and apparent delivery of a written contract. Both said that Lucy put
the writing in his pocket and then offered Zehmer $5 to seal the bargain. Not until then, even under the
defendants’ evidence, was anything said or done to indicate that the matter was a joke. Both of the 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
357
Zehmers testified that when Zehmer asked his wife to sign he whispered that it was a joke so Lucy
wouldn’t hear and that it was not intended that he should hear.
The mental assent of the parties is not requisite for the formation of a contract. If the words or other acts
of one of the parties have but one reasonable meaning, his undisclosed intention is immaterial except
when an unreasonable meaning which he attaches to his manifestations is known to the other party.
“* * * The law, therefore, judges of an agreement between two persons exclusively from those expressions
of their intentions which are communicated between them. * * *.” [Citation]
An agreement or mutual assent is of course essential to a valid contract but the law imputes to a person an
intention corresponding to the reasonable meaning of his words and acts. If his words and acts, judged by
a reasonable standard, manifest an intention to agree, it is immaterial what may be the real but
unexpressed state of his mind.
So a person cannot set up that he was merely jesting when his conduct and words would warrant a
reasonable person in believing that he intended a real agreement.
Whether the writing signed by the defendants and now sought to be enforced by the complainants was the
result of a serious offer by Lucy and a serious acceptance by the defendants, or was a serious offer by Lucy
and an acceptance in secret jest by the defendants, in either event it constituted a binding contract of sale
between the parties.…
Reversed and remanded.
CASE QUESTIONS
1. What objective evidence was there to support the defendants’ contention that they were just kidding
when they agreed to sell the farm?
2. Suppose the defendants really did think the whole thing was a kind of joke. Would that make any
difference?
3. As a matter of public policy, why does the law use an objective standard to determine the seriousness
of intention, instead of a subjective standard?
4. It’s 85 degrees in July and 5:00 p.m., quitting time. The battery in Mary’s car is out of juice, again.
Mary says, “Arrgh! I will sell this stupid car for $50!” Jason, walking to his car nearby, whips out his 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
358
checkbook and says, “It’s a deal. Leave your car here. I’ll give you a ride home and pick up your car
after you give me the title.” Do the parties have a contract?
Advertisements as Offers
Lefkowitz v. Great Minneapolis Surplus Store
86 N.W.2d 689 (Minn. 1957)
Murphy, Justice.
This is an appeal from an order of the Municipal Court of Minneapolis denying the motion of the
defendant for amended findings of fact, or, in the alternative, for a new trial. The order for judgment
awarded the plaintiff the sum of $138.50 as damages for breach of contract.
This case grows out of the alleged refusal of the defendant to sell to the plaintiff a certain fur piece which it
had offered for sale in a newspaper advertisement. It appears from the record that on April 6, 1956, the
defendant published the following advertisement in a Minneapolis newspaper:
Saturday 9 A.M. Sharp
3 Brand New Fur Coats Worth to $100.00
First Come
First Served
$1 Each
[The $100 coat would be worth about $800 in 2010 dollars.] On April 13, the defendant again published
an advertisement in the same newspaper as follows:
Saturday 9 A.M.
2 Brand New Pastel Mink 3-Skin Scarfs
Selling for. $89.50
Out they go Saturday. Each…$1.00
1 Black Lapin Stole Beautiful, worth $139.50…$1.00
First Come First Served
The record supports the findings of the court that on each of the Saturdays following the publication of the
above-described as the plaintiff was the first to present himself at the appropriate counter in the 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
359
defendant’s store and on each occasion demanded the coat and the stole so advertised and indicated his
readiness to pay the sale price of $1. On both occasions, the defendant refused to sell the merchandise to
the plaintiff, stating on the first occasion that by a “house rule” the offer was intended for women only and
sales would not be made to men, and on the second visit that plaintiff knew defendant’s house rules.
The trial court properly disallowed plaintiff’s claim for the value of the fur coats since the value of these
articles was speculative and uncertain. The only evidence of value was the advertisement itself to the effect
that the coats were “Worth to $100.00,” how much less being speculative especially in view of the price for
which they were offered for sale. With reference to the offer of the defendant on April 13, 1956, to sell the
“1 Black Lapin Stole * * * worth $139.50 * * *” the trial court held that the value of this article was
established and granted judgment in favor of the plaintiff for that amount less the $1 quoted purchase
price.
1. The defendant contends that a newspaper advertisement offering items of merchandise for sale at a
named price is a “unilateral offer” which may be withdrawn without notice. He relies upon authorities
which hold that, where an advertiser publishes in a newspaper that he has a certain quantity or
quality of goods which he wants to dispose of at certain prices and on certain terms, such
advertisements are not offers which become contracts as soon as any person to whose notice they may
come signifies his acceptance by notifying the other that he will take a certain quantity of them. Such
advertisements have been construed as an invitation for an offer of sale on the terms stated, which
offer, when received, may be accepted or rejected and which therefore does not become a contract of
sale until accepted by the seller; and until a contract has been so made, the seller may modify or
revoke such prices or terms. [Citations]
…On the facts before us we are concerned with whether the advertisement constituted an offer, and, if so,
whether the plaintiff’s conduct constituted an acceptance.
There are numerous authorities which hold that a particular advertisement in a newspaper or circular
letter relating to a sale of articles may be construed by the court as constituting an offer, acceptance of
which would complete a contract. [Citations]
The test of whether a binding obligation may originate in advertisements addressed to the general public
is “whether the facts show that some performance was promised in positive terms in return for something
requested.” 1 Williston, Contracts (Rev. ed.) s 27.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
360
The authorities above cited emphasize that, where the offer is clear, definite, and explicit, and leaves
nothing open for negotiation, it constitutes an offer, acceptance of which will complete the contract.…
Whether in any individual instance a newspaper advertisement is an offer rather than an invitation to
make an offer depends on the legal intention of the parties and the surrounding circumstances. [Citations]
We are of the view on the facts before us that the offer by the defendant of the sale of the Lapin fur was
clear, definite, and explicit, and left nothing open for negotiation. The plaintiff having successfully
managed to be the first one to appear at the seller’s place of business to be served, as requested by the
advertisement, and having offered the stated purchase price of the article, he was entitled to performance
on the part of the defendant. We think the trial court was correct in holding that there was in the conduct
of the parties a sufficient mutuality of obligation to constitute a contract of sale.
2. The defendant contends that the offer was modified by a “house rule” to the effect that only women
were qualified to receive the bargains advertised. The advertisement contained no such restriction.
This objection may be disposed of briefly by stating that, while an advertiser has the right at any time
before acceptance to modify his offer, he does not have the right, after acceptance, to impose new or
arbitrary conditions not contained in the published offer. [Citations]
Affirmed.
CASE QUESTIONS
1. If the normal rule is that display advertisements in newspapers and the like are not offers, but rather
invitations to make an offer, why was this different? Why did the court hold that this was an offer?
2. What is the rationale for the rule that a display ad is usually not an offer?
3. If a newspaper display advertisement reads, “This offer is good for two weeks,” is it still only an
invitation to make an offer, or is it an offer?
4. Is a listing by a private seller for the sale of a trailer on Craigslist or in the weekly classified
advertisements an offer or an invitation to make an offer?
Silence as Acceptance
Hobbs v.Massasoit Whip Co.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
361
33 N.E. 495 (Mass. 1893)
Holmes, J.
This is an action for the price of eel skins sent by the plaintiff to the defendant, and kept by the defendant
some months, until they were destroyed. It must be taken that the plaintiff received no notice that the
defendant declined to accept the skins. The case comes before us on exceptions to an instruction to the
jury that, whether there was any prior contract or not, if skins are sent to the defendant, and it sees fit,
whether it has agreed to take them or not, to lie back, and to say nothing, having reason to suppose that
the man who has sent them believes that it is taking them, since it says nothing about it, then, if it fails to
notify, the jury would be warranted in finding for the plaintiff.
Standing alone, and unexplained, this proposition might seem to imply that one stranger may impose a
duty upon another, and make him a purchaser, in spite of himself, by sending goods to him, unless he will
take the trouble, and bear the expense, of notifying the sender that he will not buy. The case was argued
for the defendant on that interpretation. But, in view of the evidence, we do not understand that to have
been the meaning of the judge and we do not think that the jury can have understood that to have been his
meaning. The plaintiff was not a stranger to the defendant, even if there was no contract between them.
He had sent eel skins in the same way four or five times before, and they had been accepted and paid for.
On the defendant’s testimony, it was fair to assume that if it had admitted the eel skins to be over 22
inches in length, and fit for its business, as the plaintiff testified and the jury found that they were, it
would have accepted them; that this was understood by the plaintiff; and, indeed, that there was a
standing offer to him for such skins.
In such a condition of things, the plaintiff was warranted in sending the defendant skins conforming to
the requirements, and even if the offer was not such that the contract was made as soon as skins
corresponding to its terms were sent, sending them did impose on the defendant a duty to act about them;
and silence on its part, coupled with a retention of the skins for an unreasonable time, might be found by
the jury to warrant the plaintiff in assuming that they were accepted, and thus to amount to an
acceptance. [Citations] The proposition stands on the general principle that conduct which imports
acceptance or assent is acceptance or assent, in the view of the law, whatever may have been the actual
state of mind of the party—a principle sometimes lost sight of in the cases. [Citations]
Exceptions overruled.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
362
CASE QUESTIONS
1. What is an eel, and why would anybody make a whip out of its skin?
2. Why did the court here deny the defendant’s assertion that it never accepted the plaintiff’s offer?
3. If it reasonably seems that silence is acceptance, does it make any difference what the offeree really
intended?
9.5 Summary and Exercises
Summary
Whether a legally valid contract was formed depends on a number of factors, including whether the
parties reached agreement, whether consideration was present, and whether the agreement was legal.
Agreement may seem like an intuitive concept, but intuition is not a sufficient guide to the existence of
agreement in legal terms. The most common way of examining an agreement for legal sufficiency is by
determining whether a valid offer and acceptance were made.
An offer is a manifestation of willingness to enter into a bargain such that it would be reasonable for
another individual to conclude that assent to the offer would complete the bargain. Offers must be
communicated and must be definite; that is, they must spell out terms to which the offeree can assent.
An important aspect of the offer is its duration. An offer can expire in any one of several ways: (1)
rejection, (2) counteroffer, (3) acceptance with counteroffer, (4) lapse of time, (5) death or insanity of the
offeror or destruction of an essential term, (6) illegality, and (7) revocation. No understanding of
agreement is complete without a mastery of these conditions.
To constitute an agreement, an offer must be accepted.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
363
The offeree must manifest his assent to the terms of the offer in a manner invited or required by the offer.
Complications arise when an offer is accepted indirectly through correspondence. Although offers and
revocations of offers are not effective until received, an acceptance is deemed accepted when sent if the
offeree accepts in the manner specified by the offeror. But the nuances that arise because of the mailbox
rule and acceptance by silence require close attention to the circumstances of each agreement.
EXERCISES
1. Sarah’s student apartment was unfurnished. She perused Doug’s List, an online classified ad service
(for non-merchants), and saw this advertisement: “Moving. For sale: a very nice brown leather couch,
almost new, $600.” There was an accompanying photo and contact information. Sarah e-mailed the
contact, saying she wanted to buy the couch. Does Sarah have a contract with the seller? Explain.
2. Seller called Buyer on the telephone and offered to sell his used stereo. Buyer agreed to buy it without
asking the price. The next day Buyer changed her mind and attempted to back out of the agreement.
Do the parties have a contract? Explain.
3. On August 1, Ernie wrote to Elsie offering to sell Elsie his car for $7,600, and he promised to hold the
offer open for ten days. On August 4 Ernie changed his mind; he sent Elsie a letter revoking the offer.
On August 5 Elsie e-mailed Ernie, accepting the offer. Ernie’s letter of revocation arrived on August 6.
Is there a contract? Explain.
4. On August 1 Grover visited a local electronics shop to purchase a new television. He saw one he liked
but wasn’t sure if he could afford the $750. The store owner agreed to write up and sign an offer
stating that it would be held open for ten days, which he did. On August 2 the owner changed his mind
and sent Grover an e-mail revoking the offer, which Grover received immediately. On August 3 Grover
sent a reply e-mail accepting the original offer. Is there a contract? Explain.
5. Acme Corporation sent the following letter, here set out in its entirety:
January 2, 2012
Acme Corporation
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
364
We hereby offer you 100 Acme golden widgets, size 6. This offer will be good for 10
days.
[Signed] Roberta Acme
Owner, Acme Corporation
Is this offer irrevocable for the time stated? Explain.
6. On November 26, Joe wrote to Kate offering to purchase a farm that she owned. Upon receiving the
letter on November 28, Kate immediately sent Joe a letter of acceptance. However, shortly after
mailing the letter, Kate had second thoughts and called Joe to advise him that she was rejecting his
offer. The call was made before Joe received the letter of acceptance. Has a contract been formed?
Why?
7. On a busy day just before April 15, Albert Accountant received a call from a local car dealer. The dealer
said, “Hi, Mr. Accountant. Now, while you have income from doing clients’ taxes, I have an excellent
offer for you. You can buy a new Buick Century automobile completely loaded for $36,000. Al, I know
you’re busy. If I don’t hear from you by the end of the day, I’ll assume you want the car.” Albert,
distracted, did not respond immediately, and the dealer hung up. Then followed an exhausting day of
working with anxiety-ridden tax clients. Albert forgot about the conversation. Two days later a
statement arrived from the dealer, with instructions on how Albert should pick up the car at the
dealership. Is there a contract? Explain.
8. Mr. and Mrs. Mitchell, the owners of a small secondhand store, attended an auction where they
bought a used safe for $50. The safe, part of the Sumstad estate, had a locked compartment inside, a
fact the auctioneer mentioned. After they bought the safe, the Mitchells had a locksmith open the
interior compartment; it contained $32,000 in cash. The locksmith called the police, who impounded
the safe, and a lawsuit ensued between the Mitchells and the Sumstad estate to determine the
ownership of the cash. Who should get it, and why?
9. Ivan Mestrovic, an internationally renowned artist, and his wife lived for years in a house in Indiana.
Ivan died in 1982. His widow remained in the house for some years; upon her death the contents of
the house were willed to her children. When the Wilkens bought the house from the estate, it was
very cluttered. A bank representative (the executor of the estate) said, “You can clean it yourself and 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
365
keep whatever items you want, or we—as executor of Mrs. Mestrovic’s estate—will hire a rubbish
removal service to dispose of it.” The Wilkens opted to clean it up themselves, and amid the mess,
behind sofas and in odd closets, were six apparently valuable paintings by Mestrovic. The estate
claimed them; the Wilkens claimed them. Who gets the paintings, and why?
10. David Kidd’s dog bit Mikaila Sherrod. On June 14, 2010, the Kidds offered to settle for $32,000. On July
12 the Sherrods sued the Kidds. On July 20 the Kidds bumped their offer up to $34,000. The suit was
subject to mandatory arbitration, which proceeded on April 28, 2011. On May 5 the arbitrator
awarded the Sherrods $25,000. On May 9 the Sherrods wrote to the Kidds and purported to accept
their last offer of $34,000, made the year before. The Sherrods’ attorney moved to enforce that
purported $34,000 “settlement agreement.” The court concluded that the offer was properly
accepted because it had not been withdrawn and entered judgment against the Kidds for $34,000.
The Kidds appealed. What result should obtain on appeal, and why? [1]
SELF -TEST QUESTIONS
1. In interpreting agreements for the purpose of establishing whether a valid contract exists,
courts generally apply
a. subjective standards
b. objective standards
c. either a subjective or an objective standard
d. none of the above
A valid offer must be
a. written
b. written and intended
c. communicated by letter
d. communicated and definite
An offer
a. must specify time, place, and manner of acceptance
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
366
b. must be accepted immediately to be valid
c. need not be accepted immediately
d. can only be accepted by the same means it was made
An offer generally
a. is rejected by a counteroffer
b. can be revoked if the offeror changes his or her mind
c. can lapse after a reasonable period of time
d. involves all of the above
An acceptance is generally considered effective
a. when a letter is received by the offeror
b. when a letter is mailed
c. when the offeree is silent
d. only when the acceptance is transmitted in writing
SELF -TEST ANSWERS
1. b
2. d
3. c
4. d
5. b
[1] Sherrod ex rel. Cantone v. Kidd, 155 P.3d 976 (Wash. Ct. App., 2007).
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
367
Chapter 10
Real Assent
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should understand the following:
1. Contracts require “a meeting of the minds” between competent parties, and if there is no such
“meeting,” the agreement is usually voidable.
2. Parties must enter the contract voluntarily, without duress or undue influence.
3. Misrepresentation or fraud, when proven, vitiates a contract.
4. A mistake may make a contract voidable.
5. Parties to a contract must have capacity—that is, not labor under infancy, intoxication, or insanity.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
368
We turn to the second of the four requirements for a valid contract. In addition to manifestation of assent,
a party’s assent must be real; he or she must consent to the contract freely, with adequate knowledge, and
must have capacity. The requirement of real assent raises the following major questions:
1. Did the parties enter into the contract of their own free will, or was one forced to agree under duress
or undue influence?
2. Did the parties enter into the contract with full knowledge of the facts, or was one or both led to the
agreement through fraud or mistake?
3. Did both parties have the capacity to make a contract?
10.1 Duress and Undue Influence
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Recognize that if a person makes an agreement under duress (being forced to enter a contract against
his or her will), the agreement is void.
2. Understand what undue influence is and what the typical circumstances are when it arises to make a
contract voidable.
Duress
When a person is forced to do something against his or her will, that person is said to have been the victim
of duress—compulsion. There are two types of duress: physical duress and duress by improper threat. A
contract induced by physical violence is void.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
369
Physical Duress
If a person is forced into entering a contract on threat of physical bodily harm, he or she is the victim
of physical duress. It is defined by the Restatement (Second) of Contracts in Section 174: “If conduct that
appears to be a manifestation of assent by a party who does not intend to engage in that conduct is
physically compelled by duress, the conduct is not effective as a manifestation of assent.”
Comment (a) to Section 174 provides in part, “This Section involves an application of that principle to
those relatively rare situations in which actual physical force has been used to compel a party to appear
to assent to a contract.…The essence of this type of duress is that a party is compelled by physical force to
do an act that he has no intention of doing. He is, it is sometimes said, ‘a mere mechanical instrument.’
The result is that there is no contract at all or a ‘void contract’ as distinguished from a voidable one”
(emphasis added).
The Restatement is undoubtedly correct that there are “relatively rare situations in which actual physical
force” is used to compel assent to a contract. Extortion is a crime.
Duress by Threat
The second kind of duress is duress by threat; it is more common than physical duress. Here the
perpetrator threatens the victim, who feels there is no reasonable alternative but to assent to the contract.
It renders the contract voidable. This rule contains a number of elements.
First, the threat must be improper. Second, there must be no reasonable alternative. If, for example, a
supplier threatens to hold up shipment of necessary goods unless the buyer agrees to pay more than the
contract price, this would not be duress if the buyer could purchase identical supplies from someone else.
Third, the test for inducement is subjective. It does not matter that the person threatened is unusually
timid or that a reasonable person would not have felt threatened. The question is whether the threat in
fact induced assent by the victim. Such facts as the victim’s belief that the threatened had the ability to
carry out the threat and the length of time between the threat and assent are relevant in determining
whether the threat did prompt the assent.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
370
There are many types of improper threats that might induce a party to enter into a contract: threats to
commit a crime or a tort (e.g., bodily harm or taking of property), to instigate criminal prosecution, to
instigate civil proceedings when a threat is made in bad faith, to breach a “duty of good faith and fair
dealing under a contract with the recipient,” or to disclose embarrassing details about a person’s private
life.
Jack buys a car from a local used-car salesman, Mr. Olson, and the next day realizes he bought a lemon.
He threatens to break windows in Olson’s showroom if Olson does not buy the car back for $2,150, the
purchase price. Mr. Olson agrees. The agreement is voidable, even though the underlying deal is fair, if
Olson feels he has no reasonable alternative and is frightened into agreeing. Suppose Jack knows that
Olson has been tampering with his cars’ odometers, a federal offense, and threatens to have Olson
prosecuted if he will not repurchase the car. Even though Olson may be guilty, this threat makes the
repurchase contract voidable, because it is a misuse for personal ends of a power (to go to the police)
given each of us for other purposes. If these threats failed, suppose Jack then tells Olson, “I’m going to
haul you into court and sue your pants off.” If Jack means he will sue for his purchase price, this is not an
improper threat; because everyone has the right to use the courts to gain what they think is rightfully
theirs. But if Jack meant that he would fabricate damages done him by a (falsely) claimed odometer
manipulation that would be an improper threat. Although Olson could defend against the suit, his
reputation would suffer in the meantime from his being accused of odometer tampering.
A threat to breach a contract that induces the victim to sign a new contract could be improper. Suppose
that as part of the original purchase price, Olson agrees to make all necessary repairs and replace all failed
parts for the first ninety days. At the end of one month, the transmission dies, and Jack demands a
replacement. Olson refuses to repair the car unless Jack signs a contract agreeing to buy his next car from
Olson. Whether this threat is improper depends on whether Jack has a reasonable alternative; if a
replacement transmission is readily available and Jack has the funds to pay for it, he might have an
alternative in suing Olson in small claims court for the cost. But if Jack needs the car immediately and he
is impecunious, then the threat would be improper and the contract voidable. A threat to breach a
contract is not necessarily improper, however. It depends on whether the new contract is fair and
equitable because of unanticipated circumstances. If, for example, Olson discovers that he must purchase 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
371
a replacement transmission at three times the anticipated cost, his threat to hold up work unless Jack
agrees to pay for it might be reasonable.
Undue Influence
The Restatement of Contracts (Second) characterizes undue influence as “unfair persuasion.” [1] It is a
milder form of duress than physical harm or threats. The unfairness does not lie in any
misrepresentation; rather, it occurs when the victim is under the domination of the persuader or is one
who, in view of the relationship between them, is warranted in believing that the persuader will act in a
manner detrimental to the victim’s welfare if the victim fails to assent. It is the improper use of trust or
power to deprive a person of free will and substitute instead another’s objective. Usually the fact pattern
involves the victim being isolated from receiving advice except from the persuader. Falling within this rule
are situations where, for example, a child takes advantage of an infirm parent, a doctor takes advantage of
an ill patient, or a lawyer takes advantage of an unknowledgeable client. If there has been undue
influence, the contract is voidable by the party who has been unfairly persuaded. Whether the relationship
is one of domination and the persuasion is unfair is a factual question. The answer hinges on a host of
variables, including “the unfairness of the resulting bargain, the unavailability of independent advice, and
the susceptibility of the person persuaded.” [2] See Influence”, Hodge v. Shea.
KEY TAKEAWAY
A contract induced by physical duress—threat of bodily harm—is void; a contract induced by improper
threats—another type of duress—is voidable. Voidable also are contracts induced by undue influence,
where a weak will is overborne by a stronger one.
EXERCISES
1. What are the two types of duress?
2. What are the elements necessary to support a claim of undue influence?
[1] Restatement (Second) of Contracts, Section 177.
[2] Restatement (Second) of Contracts, Section 177(b).
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
372
10.2 Misrepresentation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Understand the two types of misrepresentation: fraudulent and nonfraudulent.
2. Distinguish between fraudulent misrepresentation in the execution and fraudulent misrepresentation
in the inducement.
3. Know the elements necessary to prove fraudulent and nonfraudulent misrepresentation.
4. Recognize the remedies for misrepresentation.
General Description
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
373
The two types of misrepresentation are fraudulent and nonfraudulent. Within the former are fraud in the
execution and fraud in the inducement. Within the latter are negligent misrepresentation and innocent
misrepresentation.
Misrepresentation is a statement of fact that is not consistent with the truth. If misrepresentation is
intentional, it is fraudulent misrepresentation; if it is not intentional, it is nonfraudulent
misrepresentation, which can be either negligent or innocent.
In further taxonomy, courts distinguish between fraud in the execution and fraud in the
inducement. Fraud in the execution is defined by the Restatement as follows: “If a misrepresentation as to
the character or essential terms of a proposed contract induces conduct that appears to be a manifestation
of assent by one who neither knows nor has reasonable opportunity to know of the character or essential
terms of the proposed contract, his conduct is not effective as a manifestation of assent.” [1] For example,
Alphonse and Gaston decide to sign a written contract incorporating terms to which they have agreed. It is
properly drawn up, and Gaston reads it and approves it. Before he can sign it, however, Alphonse
shrewdly substitutes a different version to which Gaston has not agreed. Gaston signs the substitute
version. There is no contract. There has been fraud in the execution.
Fraud in the inducement is more common. It involves some misrepresentation about the subject of the
contract that induces assent. Alphonse tells Gaston that the car Gaston is buying from Alphonse has just
been overhauled—which pleases Gaston—but it has not been. This renders the contract voidable.
Fraudulent Misrepresentation
Necessary to proving fraudulent misrepresentation (usually just “fraud,” though technically “fraud” is the
crime and “fraudulent misrepresentation” is the civil wrong) is a misstatement of fact that is intentionally
made and justifiably relied upon.
Misstatement of Fact
Again, generally, any statement not in accord with the facts (a fact is something amenable to testing as
true) is a misrepresentation. Falsity does not depend on intent. A typist’s unnoticed error in a letter
(inadvertently omitting the word “not,” for example, or transposing numbers) can amount to a
misrepresentation on which the recipient may rely (it is not fraudulent misrepresentation). A half-truth
can amount to a misrepresentation, as, for example, when the seller of a hotel says that the income is from 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
374
both permanent and transient guests but fails to disclose that the bulk of the income is from single-night
stopovers by seamen using the hotel as a brothel. [2]
Concealment
Another type of misrepresentation is concealment. It is an act that is equivalent to a statement that the
facts are to the contrary and that serves to prevent the other party from learning the true statement of
affairs; it is hiding the truth. A common example is painting over defects in a building—by concealing the
defects, the owner is misrepresenting the condition of the property. The act of concealment need not be
direct; it may consist of sidetracking the other party from gaining necessary knowledge by, for example,
convincing a third person who has knowledge of the defect not to speak. Concealment is always a
misrepresentation.
Nondisclosure
A more passive type of concealment is nondisclosure. Although generally the law imposes no obligation
on anyone to speak out, nondisclosure of a fact can operate as a misrepresentation under certain
circumstances. This occurs, for example, whenever the other party has erroneous information, or, as Reed
v. King (Section 10.5.2 "Misrepresentation by Concealment") shows, where the nondisclosure amounts to
a failure to act in good faith, or where the party who conceals knows or should know that the other side
cannot, with reasonable diligence, discover the truth.
In a remarkable 1991 case out of New York, a New York City stockbroker bought an old house upstate
(basically anyplace north of New York City) in the village of Nyack, north of New York City, and then
wanted out of the deal when he discovered—the defendant seller had not told him—that it was “haunted.”
The court summarized the facts: “Plaintiff, to his horror, discovered that the house he had recently
contracted to purchase was widely reputed to be possessed by poltergeists [ghosts], reportedly seen by
defendant seller and members of her family on numerous occasions over the last nine years. Plaintiff
promptly commenced this action seeking rescission of the contract of sale. Supreme Court reluctantly
dismissed the complaint, holding that plaintiff has no remedy at law in this jurisdiction.”
The high court of New York ruled he could rescind the contract because the house was “haunted as a
matter of law”: the defendant had promoted it as such on village tours and in Reader’s Digest. She had 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
375
concealed it, and no reasonable buyer’s inspection would have revealed the “fact.” The dissent basically
hooted, saying, “The existence of a poltergeist is no more binding upon the defendants than it is upon this
court.” [3]
Statement Made False by Subsequent Events
If a statement of fact is made false by later events, it must be disclosed as false. For example, in idle
chatter one day, Alphonse tells Gaston that he owns thirty acres of land. In fact, Alphonse owns only
twenty-seven, but he decided to exaggerate a little. He meant no harm by it, since the conversation had no
import. A year later, Gaston offers to buy the “thirty acres” from Alphonse, who does not correct the
impression that Gaston has. The failure to speak is a nondisclosure—presumably intentional, in this
situation—that would allow Gaston to rescind a contract induced by his belief that he was purchasing
thirty acres.
Statements of Opinion
An opinion, of course, is not a fact; neither is sales puffery. For example, the statements “In my opinion
this apple is very tasty” and “These apples are the best in the county” are not facts; they are not expected
to be taken as true. Reliance on opinion is hazardous and generally not considered justifiable.
If Jack asks what condition the car is in that he wishes to buy, Mr. Olson’s response of “Great!” is not
ordinarily a misrepresentation. As the Restatement puts it: “The propensity of sellers and buyers to
exaggerate the advantages to the other party of the bargains they promise is well recognized, and to some
extent their assertions must be discounted.” [4] Vague statements of quality, such as that a product is
“good,” ought to suggest nothing other than that such is the personal judgment of the opinion holder.
Despite this general rule, there are certain exceptions that justify reliance on opinions and effectively
make them into facts. Merely because someone is less astute than the one with whom she is bargaining
does not give rise to a claim of justifiable reliance on an unwarranted opinion. But if the person is
inexperienced and susceptible or gullible to blandishments, the contract can be voided, as illustrated
in Vokes v. Arthur Murray, Inc. in Section 10.5.3 "Misrepresentation by Assertions of Opinion".
Misstatement of Law
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
376
Incorrect assertions of law usually do not give rise to any relief, but sometimes they do. An assertion that
“the city has repealed the sales tax” or that a court has cleared title to a parcel of land is a statement of
fact; if such assertions are false, they are governed by the same rules that govern misrepresentations of
fact generally. An assertion of the legal consequences of a given set of facts is generally an opinion on
which the recipient relies at his or her peril, especially if both parties know or assume the same facts.
Thus, if there is a lien on a house, the seller’s statement that “the courts will throw it out, you won’t be
bothered by it” is an opinion. A statement that “you can build a five-unit apartment on this property” is
not actionable because, at common law, people are supposed to know what the local and state laws are,
and nobody should rely on a layperson’s statement about the law. However, if the statement of law is
made by a lawyer or real estate broker, or some other person on whom a layperson may justifiably rely,
then it may be taken as a fact and, if untrue, as the basis for a claim of misrepresentation. (Assertions
about foreign laws are generally held to be statements of fact, not opinion.)
Assertions of Intention
Usually, assertions of intention are not considered facts. The law allows considerable leeway in the
honesty of assertions of intention. The Restatement talks in terms of “a misrepresentation of
intention…consistent with reasonable standards of fair dealing.” [5] The right to misstate intentions is
useful chiefly in the acquisition of land; the cases permit buyers to misrepresent the purpose of the
acquisition so as not to arouse the suspicion of the seller that the land is worth considerably more than his
asking price. To be a misrepresentation that will permit rescission, an assertion of intention must be false
at the time made; that is, the person asserting an intention must not then have intended it. That later he
or she does not carry out the stated intention is not proof that there was no intention at the time asserted.
Moreover, to render a contract voidable, the false assertion of intention must be harmful in some way to
other interests of the recipient. Thus, in the common example, the buyer of land tells the seller that he
intends to build a residence on the lot, but he actually intends to put up a factory and has lied because he
knows that otherwise the seller will not part with it because her own home is on an adjacent lot. The
contract is voidable by the seller. So a developer says, as regards the picturesque old barn on the property,
“I’ll sure try to save it,” but after he buys the land he realizes it would be very expensive (and in the way),
so he does not try to save it. No misrepresentation.
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
377
Intentionally Made Misrepresentation
The second element necessary to prove fraud is that the misrepresentation was intentionally made. A
misrepresentation is intentionally made “if the maker intends his assertion to induce a party to manifest
his assent and the maker (a) knows or believes that the assertion is not in accord with the facts, or (b)
does not have the confidence that he states or implies in the truth of the assertion, or (c) knows that he
does not have the basis that he states or implies for the assertion.” [6]
The question of intent often has practical consequences in terms of the remedy available to the plaintiff. If
the misrepresentation is fraudulent, the plaintiff may, as an alternative to avoiding the contract, recover
damages. Some of this is discussed in Section 10.2.4 "Remedies" and more fully in Chapter 16 "Remedies",
where we see that some states would force the plaintiff to elect one of these two remedies, whereas other
states would allow the plaintiff to pursue both remedies (although only one type of recovery would
eventually be allowed). If the misrepresentation is not intentional, then the common law allowed the
plaintiff only the remedy of rescission. But the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC), Section 2-721, allows
both remedies in contracts for the sale of goods, whether the misrepresentation is fraudulent or not, and
does not require election of remedies.
Reliance
The final element necessary to prove fraud is reliance by the victim. He or she must show that the
misrepresentation induced assent—that is, he or she relied on it. The reliance need not be solely on the
false assertion; the defendant cannot win the case by demonstrating that the plaintiff would have assented
to the contract even without the misrepresentation. It is sufficient to avoid the contract if the plaintiff
weighed the assertion as one of the important factors leading him to make the contract, and he believed it
to be true. The person who asserts reliance to avoid a contract must have acted in good faith and
reasonably in relying on the false assertion. Thus if the victim failed to read documents given him that
truly stated the facts, he cannot later complain that he relied on a contrary statement, as, for example,
when the purchaser of a car dealership was told the inventory consisted of new cars, but the supporting
papers, receipt of which he acknowledged, clearly stated how many miles each car had been driven. If Mr.
Olson tells Jack that the car Jack is interested in is “a recognized classic,” and if Jack doesn’t care a whit 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books Saylor.org
378
about that but buys the car because he likes its tail fins, he will have no case against Mr. Olson when he
finds out the car is not a classic: it didn’t matter to him, and he didn’t rely on it.
Ordinarily, the person relying on a statement need not verify it independently. However, if verification is
relatively easy, or if the statement is one that concerns matters peculiarly within the person’s purview, he
or she may not be held to have justifiably relied on the other party’s false assertion. Moreover, usually the
rule of reliance applies to statements about past events or existing facts, not about the occurrence of
events in the future.
Nonfraudulent Misrepresentation
Nonfraudulent misrepresentation may also be grounds for some relief. There are two types: negligent
misrepresentation and innocent misrepresentation.
Negligent Misrepresentation
